SPRINGFIELD – A man allegedly beaten by police during a traffic stop in 2009 is suing a half-dozen Springfield officers, Police Commissioner William J. Fitchet, and the city in federal court.

Melvin Jones III, who was struck by a patrolman wielding a flashlight during a traffic stop, filed suit in U.S. District Court on Thursday, stating he was beaten unconscious, blinded in one eye and went to the hospital with a broken nose, fingers, teeth and facial bones. The lawsuit alleges police brutality and an attempted cover-up. It seeks money damages and attorney's fees.

Police Sgt. John M. Delaney, executive aide to Fitchet, insisted the members of the force are well-trained and that Jones’ criminal record will be a liability in a courtroom.

"It's not the first time officers have been sued and it won't be the last," Delaney said. "The Springfield Police Department is and will continue to be one of the most professional police departments in New England. Mr. Jones has to know his criminal past will follow him during litigation."

Court records also show the FBI has been investigating the incident and taking witness statements since shortly after the incident on Nov. 27, 2009, on Rifle Street. The traffic stop and subsequent beating was caught on amateur videotape and resulted in a public furor, an internal investigation that led to the suspension of three officers and the firing of another, and criminal charges against retired Patrolman Jeffrey M. Asher, the officer who struck Jones repeatedly with his flashlight.

The lawsuit also accuses the officers, who are white, of violating the civil rights of Jones, who is black.

Along with Asher and Fitchet, also named in the lawsuit are officers Michael J. Sedergren and Theodore Truiolo, Sgts. Brian Manley and Christopher Hitas, and Lt. John M. Bobianski. Manley was the booking officer and Hitas was the “approving officer,” according to the complaint.

Sedergren, Asher, Truiolo and Bobianski were present during the traffic stop.

In the police report following Jones’ arrest on drug charges, officers said Asher hit Jones with the flashlight after Jones grabbed one of the officer’s gun in a struggle during his arrest. However, Jones denied this and one eyewitness to the stop told FBI agents he only saw Jones try to pull away as officers wrestled him onto the hood of the car in which he was a passenger.

Asher faces assault charges in Holyoke District Court in connection with the incident. His lawyer has argued Asher only used necessary force to subdue Jones.

The lawsuit states that Sedergren called Jones a “nigger” during the beating, and that he and Truiolo kicked Jones in the groin and back before Asher hit him with his police-issued flashlight. It alleges Jones was beaten unconscious and one witness told the FBI he saw Jones slump to the ground after the first couple of blows. The videotape appears to show Asher hitting him nearly 20 times. Bobianski watched the scene unfold, according to the federal lawsuit.

The complaint, filed by Holyoke lawyer Shawn P. Allyn, alleges a history of beatings by Asher and at least seven prior citizens’ complaints against him.

“The acts of Officer Jeffrey Asher were so flagrant and widespread prior to the event with Melvin Jones the (city) had actual knowledge of his illegal practices and customs,” the lawsuit says.

Asher, who also was caught on amateur videotape in the 1990s kicking a black suspect while he was on the ground in handcuffs, was fired by Fitchet late last year. However, the ouster was largely symbolic as Asher received a disability retirement the day before he was fired.

Indeed, during an interview with FBI agents in March 2010, Police Capt. C. Lee Bennett told agents that Bobianski verbally reported the incident to her the night it occurred, adding that “Jeff Asher hit him,” FBI records show.

Bennett was alarmed, and added “that she had worked in the (police department’s) Internal Investigations Unit prior to her promotion and had been involved with IIU during officer Asher’s previous excessive force incidents,” according to the FBI report.

Springfield FBI supervisor Mark S. Karangekis confirmed there is an ongoing investigation into the incident, but would not comment further.

Records show Karangekis and another agent interviewed Jones’ father, the driver of the vehicle, and an eyewitness who was with the woman who videotaped the incident. He told agents the woman was tempted to destroy the tape, fearing “repercussions,” but he convinced her not to, arguing it was Jones’ “get out of jail free card,” a report of his interview states.