No}

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS

SUFFOLK, ss. SUPERIOR COURT
CIVIL ACTION
No, 2016-02143-H RE
CEIVED.
DENISE DOHERTY, oo
Plaintiff, SUL FUE
YS.
MA OF of Atumncy General
MASSACHUSETTS CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION rs oe
and DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE, AchininiettiseRpwe Division
Defendants.
MEMORANDUM OF DECISION AND ORDER ON CROSS-MOTIONS RECEIVED
FOR JUDGMENT ON THE PLEADINGS
JUL - 3 2018
The plaintiff, Denise Doherty (“Doherty”), moved for judgment on the pleadings,
COMMONWEALTH OF MASS

and the defendants, Massachusetts Department of State Police (“MSP”) and CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION

Qo o Massachusetts Civil Service Commission (the “Commission”, cross-moved for judgment
06.24, {& onthe pleadings, on Doherty’s Complaint for Judicial Review (the “Complaint”), In her
" BH Complaint, Doherty appeals, pursuant to G. L. c. 30A, sec. 14 and G. L. c. 31, see. 44,

———~ the Commission’s June 9, 2016 decision (the “Decision”), finding that MSP had just

ST.c
—_—_ cause to discipline her and requiring that she forfeit two days of accrued leave time.’ A.R.
CH
L 370-390.2 The Court heard oral argument on May 23, 2018.
RAG
—— For the reasons discussed below, the Court concludes that it was error to close the

: Pl entire hearing after a few preliminary matters, but because there was no resulting

RY} ( Frejudice to Doherty she does not have the right to a new hearing. The Court further
a

oy

' This Court previously ruled, over MSP’s objection, that the Commission had jurisdiction to review the
discipline imposed on Doherty by the Calonel of MSP. See Docket # 11 (Opinion dated May 5, 2017).

**A R” refers to the Administrative Record, including the Findings of Fact (“FF”), and “Tr.” refers to the
transcript of the Commission hearing. “CSC Br.,” “MSP Br.” and “Doherty Br.“ refer to the parties* briefs

on the pending motions.

]

finds that the Decision is supported by substantial evidence, and is not arbitrary and
capricious or contrary to law. Therefore, Judgment on the Pleadings shall enter in favor
of MSP and the Commission, and the Commission’s decision shall be AFFIRMED.

PROCEDURAL HISTORY AND RELEVANT
FINDINGS OF THE COMMISSION

In February 2016, an MSP trial board found that Doherty had committed five
violations of Massachusetts State Police Rules and Regulations, Article 5.8.1
(Unsatisfactory Performance) by engaging in five instances of unprofessional conduct in
or around November 2012. A.R. 3, 383-384. Doherty timely appealed to the
Commission, and a hearing was conducted on April 8, 2016 by the Commission’s
Chairman. See Tr. at 1. The witnesses were Doherty, another MSP employee, and two
employees of security company XYZ Watch Guard Company (“XYZ”),} identified in the
record by their initials F.E. and N.R. See Tr. at 2. The Commission issued its decision
on June 9, 2016. A.R. 390.

As found by the Commission, at the time of the hearing Doherty had been
employed by MSP for over 20 years and held the rank of sergeant. FF 1. In October
2011, while assigned to MSP’s certification unit, Doherty began an administrative
inspection of a Boston-area college that included an inspection of XYZ. FF 10. As part
of the inspection, Doherty obtained affidavits of XYZ’s employees stating that they had
never been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude, a condition of employment
at security companies. FF 3, 12-13. Based on criminal record checks of XYZ’s

employees, Doherty determined that 10 or 11 employees had felony convictions, FF 14.

> Because the Commission used the pseudonym XYZ Watch Guard Company in its decision, the Court
does the same.

Doherty began contacting these employees in late November or early December 2012.
FF 15.

Although the MSP trial board found five violations of MSP’s professionalism
standards by Doherty in the course of her interviews of XYZ employees, and the
Commission affirmed the trial board’s decision, it is sufficient for purposes of this
Opinion to discuss only the most significant violation, which involves XYZ employee
F.E..4 The Decision describes F.E. as “a black female who has been employed as a
technician at a large telecommunications company for thirty-seven (37) years... [and]
had also been a part-time employee of XYZ for 8 years and worked weekends at a Boston
hospital as a security guard.” FF 16. Although F.E. had no criminal record, and wound
up losing time at work due to Doherty’s mistake, Doherty refused to assist F_E. in
clearing up the mistake, see FF 22-25, 30, and was “harsh, negative, sarcastic and mean-
spirited” in her interactions with F.E., see A.R. 387. As found by the Chairman of the

Commission:

In the case of F.E., [Doherty’s] cavalier attitude resulted in a serious
injustice. Had Doherty actually /istened to F.E., and run one additional
query that would have taken seconds, she would have learned that there
was a real question as to whether F.E. had ever been convicted of a felony

(which she was not).

A.R. 387 (emphasis in original). The Chairman concluded that, “[g]iven the rather

egregious degree of unprofessionalism here, I find the discipline imposed here relatively

4 The trial board recommended and the Commission affirmed Doherty’s forfeiture of two days of accrued
time for each offense, but the sanctions were imposed cancurrently for a total loss of only two days of
accrued time. In contrast to multiple criminal convictions, which have significance even if the sentences on
those convictions run concurrently, Doherty in essence received no sanction for four of her five violations,

one of which was clearly more serious than the others.

3

lenient and certainly not worthy of a downward modification by the Commission. A.R.
390. The Commission unanimously supported the Decision. Id.
Doherty filed a timely appeal to this Court.
DISCUSSION

A. The Lack of a Public Hearing, Though Error, Did Not Prejudice Doherty,
and Therefore Provides No Basis for a New Hearing

1. The right to a public hearing, Defendants’ position on that right

Doherty's hearing before the Commission was held under G. L. c. 31, sec. 43.
That section provides in relevant part: “Any hearing pursuant to this section shall be
public if either party to the hearing files a written request that it be public.” G. L. c. 31,
sec. 43 (emphasis added). The mandatory nature of this provision is clear, No party
disputes that Doherty made a proper request that the hearing be public. Instead, the
Commission and MSP argue that the pervasive use of Criminal Offender Record
Information (“CORI”) evidence during the hearing made it necessary for the Commission
to close the hearing. See CSC Br. at 8-12; MSP Br. at 13-17. The Commission also
argues that, even if it was error to close the hearing, the Commission’s decision must be
affirmed because Doherty has not demonstrated that her substantial rights were
prejudiced by the closure. See CSC Br.at 13-17. The Court finds that, while it was error
to close the entire hearing after a few preliminary matters, there was no resulting
prejudice to Doherty, and therefore no grounds for a new hearing.

2. The Commission failed to adequately balance Doherty’s right to.a public
hearing against the need to protect COR] evidence

Although the Commissioner did not cite G. L. ¢. 6, § 172, he recognized that

G. L. ¢. 31, § 43 conflicted with the public disclosure of CORI evidence, which is
protected under G, L. c. 6, § 172. What the Commissioner failed to do was to harmonize
the two statutes. As the Commission acknowledges in its brief, “Where two statutes
appear to be in conflict, [courts] do not mechanically determine that the more recent or
more specific statute tramps the other. Instead [courts] endeavor to harmonize the two

statutes so that the policies underlying both may be honored.” George v. Nat'l Water

Main Cleaning Co., 477 Mass. 371, 378 (2017) (citations and quotations omitted), See

CSC Br. at 10.

Here, instead of attempting to harmonize G. L. c. 31, § 43, and G. L. c. 6, § 172,
the Commissioner closed the entire hearing after discussing a few preliminary matters,
Closing the entire hearing clearly was not necessary. Indeed, the two most important
witnesses - Doherty and FE, - had no criminal record and could have testified publicly
without the disclosure of CORI evidence. It was error for the Commissioner to close the

entire hearing under these circumstances.

3. The lack of'a public hearing did not prejudice Doherty, and therefore there are

no grounds for a new hearing

A reviewing court cannot set aside or modify an agency decision unless it finds
that “the substantial rights of any party may have been prejudiced.” G. L. c. 30A, § 14.
Whether closing all or most of a Commission hearing over a party’s objection is per se
prejudicial to that party appears to be an issue of first impression. This Court holds that
Doherty must demonstrate prejudice to get a new hearing and that she has failed to do so.

The parties cite no case law, and this Court is not aware of any case law, holding

that the closure of an agency hearing per se violates the due process rights or other

substantial rights of a litigant who attended and fully participated in the hearing. This
Court declines to create such a right.

Doherty argues in essence that closing a Commission hearing over a party’s
objection constitutes structural error, i.¢., error that is prejudicial per se. See Doherty Br.,
section I]. However, as the Commission notes, “Structural error is a particular type of
error. Generally, it is error that necessarily render[s] a criminal trial fundamentally unfair
or an unreliable vehicle for determining guilt or innocence.” Commonwealth v.
Hampton, 457 Mass. 152, 163 (2010) (additional citations and quotations omitted), In
the absence of more specific law, this Court must rely on the general proposition that
“due process requires that there be notice and an opportunity to be heard ‘at a meaningful

time and in a meaningful manner.’” Adoption of Simone, 427 Mass. 34, 39 (1998),

quoting Armstrong v. Manzo, 380 U.S. 545, 552 (1965). Doherty does not point to any

prejudice that resulted from closure of the hearing. Doherty had notice of the hearing,
attended the entire hearing and testified; she had the right to introduce exhibits, and her
attorney cross-examined all of MSPs witnesses. See Tr. at 5, 64-91, 128-151, 186-213,
221-323. Moreover, despite closure of the hearing, Doherty’s husband was allowed to
attend the hearing. See Tr. at 9-10.° When others were asked to leave the hearing
Doherty made no showing or even statement as to any resulting harm, See Tr. at 14,
Under these circumstances, the Court finds no prejudice to Doherty of her substantial

rights, and therefore no grounds for a new hearing.

5 Although the Commissioner described his decision to let Doherty’s husband attend the hearing as

“blatantly, probably, inconsistent” with his decision to close the hearing, Tr. at 9, the decision could also be —

viewed as an attempt to harmonize conflicting statutes,

6

B. The Commission’s Decision Must Be Affirmed

1. The legal standard

Pursuant to G.L. ¢, 30A, sec. 14(7), this Court may reverse, remand, or modify an
agency decision only if the decision is “based on an error of law, unsupported by
substantial evidence, unwarranted by facts found on the record as submitted, arbitrary and
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.”

Massachusetts Inst. of Tech. v. Department of Pub. Utils., 425 Mass. 856, 867-868

(1997), Plaintiff bears the burden of demonstrating the invalidity of the Department’s

decision. Merisme v. Board of Appeal on Motor Vehicle Liab. Policies and Bonds, 27

Mass. App. Ct. 470, 474 (1989). Factual disputes and matters of credibility are for the

agency, not this Court, to resolve. Greater Media, Inc. v. Department of Public Utilities,

415 Mass. 409, 417 (1993).

In reviewing an agency decision, the Court is required to "give due weight to the
experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge of the agency, as well as to
the discretionary authority conferred upon it" by statute, G.L. c. 30A, sec. 14(7) (1997),

Flint v. Commissioner of Pub. Welfare, 412 Mass. 416, 420 (1992); Seagram Distillers

Co. v. Alcoholic Beverages Control Comm'n, 401 Mass. 713, 721 (1988). The reviewing

court may not substitute its judgment for that of the agency. Southern Worcester County

Regional Vocational Sch. v. Labor Relations Comm'n, 386 Mass. 414, 420-21 (1982),

citing Olde Towne Liquor Store, Inc. v. Alcoholic Beverages Control Comm'n, 372

Mass. 152, 154 (1977).

2. Application of the legal standard

There is no basis for disturbing the Decision, which was the result of a thorough
hearing, see Tr, 1-324, and careful analysis, see A.R. 370-390, The Commissioner
credited F.E.’s (and N.R.‘s) testimony. A.R. at 386-387. Such credibility determinations

are the province of any administrative agency. See Greater Media, 415 Mass. at 417.

The Decision is factually and legally supported. The Court agrees with the
Commission that, given Doherty’s conduct, the discipline imposed was “relatively
lenient.” A.R. 390. Of course, this Court should not, and will not, substitute its judgment

as to the penalty for that of the agency. See Southern Worcester Co. Reg’] Vocational

Sch., 386 Mass. at 420-421.

CONCLUSION AND ORDER

For the above reasons, Plaintiff, Denise Doherty’s Motion for Judgment on the
Pleadings (Docket # 13) is DENTED, and the cross-motions for judgment on the
pleadings of Massachusetts Civil Service Commission (part of Docket # 14) and
Department of State Police (part of Docket # 15) are ALLOWED. The Decision of the
Commission is AFFIRMED. Judgment on the pleadings shall enter in favor of the

Defendants, and the case shall be closed.

[.” a }

Rofert L. Ujimann
Justice of the Superior Court

ahs

wm gt

Date: June LS , 2018

