1 
 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
        CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
       One Ashburton Place, Room 503  
       Boston, MA 02108  
        
 
JEFFREY GODERE , 
 Appellant  
 
      v.      D1-18-217 
 
CITY OF CHICOPEE , 
 Respondent  
 
Appearance for Appellant :   Andrew J. Gambaccini , Esq.  
       Reardon, Joyce & Akerson, P.C.  
       4 Lancaster Terrace  
       Worcester, MA  01609  
        
Appearance for Respondent :   Thomas J. Rooke , Esq. 
  City of Chicopee Law Department  
  17 Springfield Street  
      Chicopee,  MA 01013  
       
Commissioner:     Christopher C. Bowman  
 
DECISION  
 On November 8, 2018, the Appellant, Jeffrey Godere  (Sgt. Godere ), pursuant to the 
provisions of G.L. c. 31, § 43, filed an appeal with the Civil Service Commission (Commission) 
contesting t he decision of the Respondent, the City of Chicopee (City) to terminate his 
employment as a police sergeant.  I held a pre -hearing conference at the Springfield State 
Building in Springfield, MA on November 28, 2018.  I held a full hearing at the same loca tion on 
February 27, 2019 and March 13, 2019.1  On March 14, 2019, a conference call  was held to take 
additional testimony. At the request of Sgt. Godere , the proceeding s were declared public.  Three 
                                                 
1 The Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure; 801 CMR §§ 1.00 et. seq.; apply to adjudications 
before the Commission, with G.L. c. 31, or any Commission rules, taking precedence.  2 
 (3) CDs were made of the hearing, including the conferen ce call.2  Both parties submitted 
proposed decisions to the Commission.  
FINDINGS OF FACT:  
     Based upon the documents entered into evidence (Respondent Exhibits 1 -21 and Appellant 
Exhibits 1 -15), stipulated facts, the testimony of:  
Called by the City:  
 William Jebb, Chicopee Police Chief;  
 Mark Wilkes, Chicopee Police Officer;  
 The Honorable Mark G. Mastroianni, former Hampden County District Attorney;3 
Called by Sgt. Godere : 
 Mayor Richard Kos, City of Chicopee;  
 Richard Nunes, retired Chicopee Police Lieutenant;  
 Thomas Charette, retired Chicopee Police Chief ; 
 Jeffrey Godere , Appellant;  
and taking administrative notice of all matters filed in the case, pertinent statutes, regulations,  
policies, stipulations and reasonable inferences from the credible e vidence, a preponderance of  
the evidence establishes the following:  
1. Sgt. Godere is forty -seven years old and has lived in Chicopee for most of his life.  He is 
married, with two biological children and two step -children. He received an associate’s 
degree in criminal justice from Quincy College and a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice 
from Curry College. (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
                                                 
2 Subsequent to the hearing, the parties had the recordings tra nscribed and a copy of the transcript was provided to 
the Commission.  That transcript is deemed to be the official record of the proceedings.  
3 Judge Mastroianni  is now a federal district court judge.  At the outset of his testimony, he emphasized that hi s 
Testimony was solely related to his tenure as a Hampden County District Attorney.   To avoid confusion, the  
decision, at times, simply refers to him as “Mastroianni”.    3 
 2. Sgt. Godere served as a special police officer in Chicopee from 1994 to 2001 before being 
appointed as a permanent, full -time police officer in February 2001.  He was promoted to the 
position of sergeant in June 2011. (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
3. Chief William Jebb has been the Chief of Police for the past five years.  (Testimony of Chief 
Jebb)4 
4. At approximately 7:00 P.M. o n Augus t 26, 2011, over nine years ago, Chicopee officers, 
including Sgt. Godere, responded to an apartment for a call of an unresponsive person.  
(Testimony of Sgt. Godere; Exhibit R13) 
5. Below is a list of relevant persons and their titles as of August 26, 2011 : 
Relevant Person     Title  
 Michael Bissonnette    Mayor  
 Mark G. Mastroianni    Hampden County District Attorney  
 John Ferraro     Police Chief  
 William Jebb     Deputy in charge of internal affairs  
 Thomas Charette     Police Captain  
 Jeffrey Godere     Police Sergeant  
 KL      Police Sergeant  
 TD      Police Officer  
 CL      Police Officer  
 MC     Police Officer       
6. Upon arrival at the scene on August 26, 2011, a female was discovered on the floor; once the 
female was determined to be deceased, apparently as a result of a homicide, Sgt. Godere 
                                                 
4 As Chief Jebb held different titles during the relevant time period, the decision r efers to him as “Jebb” instead  
of Chief Jebb to avoid any confusion.  4 
 directed responding personnel to clear the apartment and posted Officer T D at the door to 
maintain a log of persons who entered the scene. (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
7. Sgt. KL was also at the scene on August 26, 2011. (Exhibit R13)  
8. While at the scene, Sgt. KL and Officer TC each used their cell phones to take a photograph 
of the female . (Exhibit R13)  
9. When the Chicopee Police Department Detective Bureau arrived, Sgt. Godere left the scene  
and eventually returned to the police station sometime after 8:00 P.M . (Testimony of Sgt. 
Godere)  
10. Sgt. KL, who was the office r in charge at the pol ice station that night, also returned to the 
police station. (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
11. While at the police station, Sgt. KL showed Sgt. Godere the picture that he (Sgt. KL) had 
taken of the female on his cell phone, stating words to the effect, “this is w hy you want to 
stay out of the scene, not contaminate it.” (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
12. Sgt. Godere, after looking at the photograph of the female on Sgt. KL’s phone, asked Sgt. KL 
to send it to him (Sgt. Godere). (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)5 
13. “Right after” Sg t. KL showed the photograph to Sgt. Godere, Sgt. KL sent the picture to Sgt. 
Godere’s cell phone. (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
14. Sgt. Godere subsequently forwarded the photograph  of the female  that he had received from 
Sgt. KL to Officer CL. (Exhibit R13)  
15. The next day, on August 27, 2011, over a period of several hours, Officer TD sent the 
photograph that he had taken of the female  to nine fellow  Chicopee police officers  (including 
Officer MC) , via individual text messages. (Exhibit R13)  
                                                 
5 Sgt. Godere’s exact testimony was “I might have asked him to send it to me. I don’t remember … I might have  
asked him for it as he was showing it to me.  I just don’t have a certaint y of asking him.”  I have found that it is  
more likely than not that Sgt. Godere did indeed ask Sgt. KL to send him the photograph.  5 
 16. Officer CL was involved in youth sports in Agawam.  On August 27, 2011, Officer CL 
showed the picture of the female that he had received from Sgt. Godere to multiple parents 
whose children were participating in a sporting event at Phelps Field in Agawam that day. 
(Exhib it R13)  
17. Approximately one month later, on October 3, 2011,  the Chicopee Police Department 
became aware of the allegation that Officer CL had shown the photograph of the female to 
parents at Phelps Field . Jebb , who was then Deputy Chief in charge of interna l affairs,  
commenced an internal investigation. (Testimony of Jebb and Exhibit 13)  
18. After the potential existence of crime scene photographs being disseminated became known 
in the Fall of 20 11, the Hampden County District Attorney’s Office, then headed by Judge  
Mastroianni, became apprised of the situation.  He was deeply troubled by the allegations for 
many reasons, including the fact that pictures taken by first responders would be significant 
in any criminal prosecution related to the case as such images  would need to part of the 
prosecution’s discovery production.  In both written and verbal exchanges, Mastroianni 
stressed the serious and consequential nature of this matter to the City’s Mayor at the time, 
Mayor Bissonnette. (Testimony of Judge  Mastroian ni) 
19. Jebb’s internal investigation took place over approximately four months, from October 2011 
to February 2012.  As part of his investigation, he conducted multiple interviews (with 
citizens and police officers) and reviewed the phone records of various p olice officers.  
(Exhibit R13 and Testimony of Jebb)  
20. Most relevant to this appeal , as it relates to untruthfulness, are the written statements and 
interview responses of four individuals:  Officer CL; Officer TD; Officer MC ; and Sgt. 
Godere. (Exhibit R13)  6 
 Written and Oral Statements of Officer CL  
21. As referenced above, Officer CL received a photograph of the female from Sgt. Godere and 
showed the photograph to parents at a youth sports event.   
22. On October 4, 2011, Jebb met with Officer CL.   In his interview wi th Jebb, Officer CL 
denied receiving a photograph of the female, discussing such a photograph or showing such a 
photograph  to anyone. (Exhibit R13)  
23. In a written report dated October 5, 2011, Officer CL again denied ever receiving, 
possessing, showing or se nding a picture of the female. (Exhibit R13)  
24. On November 30, 2011, Jebb met with Officer CL again and informed him that he had 
uncovered information which contradicted Officer CL’s denials.  Officer CL stood by his 
previous denials. (Exhibit R13)  
25. On Januar y 24, 2012, Officer CL told Jebb that he had not been honest during the 
investigation and admitted to possessing the photograph and showing it to parents. (Exhibit 
R13)  
26. When asked by Jebb who sent him the photograph, Officer CL stated that he didn’t want t o 
get anyone in trouble.  When pressed by Jebb, Officer CL told Jebb that it was a supervisor 
and then showed Jebb his cell phone records in which the name of Sgt. Godere, a supervisor, 
appeared. (Exhibit R13)  
Written and Oral Statements of Officer TD  
27. As referenced above, Officer TD, who was at the crime scene, took a photograph of the 
female and sent it to multiple other police officers, including Officer MC.    
28. On October 4, 2011, Jebb interviewed Officer TD.  7 
 29. In his interview with Jebb, Officer TD adm itted that he took one photograph of the female 
and sen t it to others, but stated that he could not remember  who he sent the photograph to.  
Even after stepping outside the room and discussing the matter with his union representative, 
Officer TD returned to the interview and told Jebb that he could not remember who he sent 
the photograph to. (Exhibit R13)  
30. In a l etter to Jebb dated the same day (October 4, 2011), Officer TD acknowledged taking 
and sending the photograph, but wrote, “To the best of my knowledge I regretfully do not 
recall to who or whom I sent the picture to.” (Exhibit R13)   
31. Officer TD also denied  that the photograph was sent out multiple times, indicating instead 
that it was sent as a group message, a statement that the investigation later revealed to be 
false, as multiple messages were sent by Officer TD over a period of hours. (Exhibit R13)  
Written and Oral Statements of Officer MC  
32. As referenced above, Officer MC was one of the many police officers who received a 
photograph of the female from Officer TD.  
33. On October 5, 2011, Jebb interviewed Officer MC. (Exhibit R13)  
34. Officer MC acknowledged that he received the photograph.  When asked if he received the 
photograph from Officer TD , he stated that he was “99% certain” that he did. (Exhibit R13)  
35. One day later, on October 6, 2011, however, Officer MC submitted the following written 
statement to Jebb:  
“On Wednesday, October 5, 2011 I was called into your office in regards to a picture being 
sent to my phone.  On an unknown date, I do recall receiving a picture of the female victim 
of the homicide … I do not remember who the message was sent from, or whe n exactly I 
received the message …”. (Exhibit R11 ) 8 
 Written and Oral Statements of Sgt. Godere  
36. As referenced above, Sgt. Godere, on the night of the murder, viewed a picture of the female 
taken by Sgt KL.  Sgt. Godere asked Sgt. KL to send it to him.  Sgt. KL immediately sent the 
photograph of the female to Sgt. Godere.  Sgt. Godere subsequently forwarded the picture of 
the female to Police Officer CL.  
37. On January 26, 2012, two days after learning from Officer CL that he (Officer CL) had 
received the photogra ph of the female from Sgt. Godere, Jebb sent the following email to 
Sgt. Godere:  
“Sgt. Godere,  
 
I thought I had already accomplished this, but I researched my records and discovered that I 
had not received a report from you or it was misplaced.  If I misp laced your response, please 
resubmit it.  If not, I need a report from you answering the following questions:  
 
1. Did you take or receive a photograph of homicide victim [redacted]?  
2. If you did not take the photograph, who sent it to you?  
3. Did you forward this photograph to anyone?  
 
Please submit your report to me ASAP in a To/From format with signature.”  (Exhibit R12)6 
 
38. On January 28, 2012, Sgt. Godere submitted a written report to Jebb stating:  
“Sir,  
 
On January 27, 2012, I received an email from you asking m e to answer three questions.  The 
following are the questions you asked me to answer with my response.  
 
1. Did I take or receive a picture of [redacted]?  
 
I did not take any picture of [redacted].  I do remember receiving a picture through text 
message.  
 
2. If you did not take a picture, who did you get it from?  
                                                 
6 A relevant issue here is whether this January 26, 2012 email (from Jebb to Godere) was the first time that Jebb  
communic ated with Godere about this issue.  Jebb testified that, weeks prior to this email, in a one -on-one  
conversation, Godere denied receiving or sending a photograph of the female.  Godere denies that this conversation  
ever took place.  For reasons discussed  in the analysis, I believe that Godere has a better recollection of what  
occured .  9 
  
This picture would have been sent to me over five months ago, I receive different 
pictures, jokes and videos that people send me and I do not recall who sent me the 
picture.  
 
3. If I sent a picture to anyon e, who did I send it to?  
 
Again, I receive different pictures, jokes and videos on my phone.  Some of those 
pictures, jokes and videos I forward to others. I do not recall if I sent this particular 
picture to anyone.  
 
Respectfully,  
Sgt. Jeffrey Godere”   
(Exhibit R12)  
 
39. On January 30, 2012 , Jebb sent another email to Sgt. Godere that read as follows:  
“Sgt. Godere,  
 
It’s unfortunate that you are having problems with your memory.  Fortunately for you, I am 
willing to help with this issue.  Therefore, I am re questing that you contact your wireless 
provide r and obtain a copy of your picture/data transactions for 8/26/11 to 9/15/11.  Pay 
particular attention to 8/27/11 at 12:40 hours, if this helps with your memory, submit a report 
to me with this information, a long with a copy of these transactions.  
 
Deputy Chief.” (Exhibit R12)7 
 
40. On January 31, 2012, Jebb sent a third email to Sgt. Godere that read as follows:  
“Sgt. Godere,  
 
You will have eight hours to refresh your memory at work.  Therefore, I am requesting your 
report to my office at 08:00 hours with a union representative on your first day back to work.  
 
Deputy Chief.” (Exhibit R12)  
 
41. On February 2, 2012, Sgt. Godere reported to Jebb’s office, along with his union 
representative. Jebb advised Sgt. Godere tha t he wanted Sgt. Godere to be truthful and 
wanted to know everything regarding the photograph of the female and Sgt. Godere’s 
                                                 
7 There was a considerable back -and-forth at the hearing regarding how and when Sgt. Godere retrieved his cell  
phone records.  For reasons discussed in the analysis, I ul timately determined that this information was irrelevant as  
I have concluded that, even without consulting his cell phone records, Sgt. Godere, when first questioned by Jebb on  
January 26, 2012, knew who sent him the photograph and who he sent it to, wit hout the need to refresh his memory  
by reviewing his cell phone records.  10 
 involvement from the onset.  Sgt. Godere stated that he was concerned about being a “rat”.  
Sgt. Godere asked to be excused from J ebb’s office to talk to his union representative.  After 
returning to the Jebb’s office, Sgt. Godere acknowledged that he received the photograph of 
the female from Sgt. KL and  that he had then forwarded it to Officer CL. (Testimony of 
Chief Jebb and Sgt. Godere)8 
42. That same day, on February 2, 2012, Sgt. Godere sent a written report to Jebb which read in 
part: 
“ … Sometime after clearing the scene [on August 26, 2011], between 7:00 P.M. and 
midnight, I received a picture message from Sgt. [KL] of the murder  victim.  I am not sure of 
the exact time I received the picture.  On 8/27/11 at 00:40 hours, I forwarded a picture 
message to Officer [CL] (Exhibit R12)  
 
43. Jebb, who was then Deputy Chief in charge of Internal Affairs, met with then -Chief Ferraro 
to review his findings.  Chief Ferraro informed Jebb that he (Ferraro) did not want to charge 
any of the above -referenced officers with untruthfulness, but that Officer CL was deserving 
of more discipline than the other three individuals (Testimony of Chief Jebb)9 
44. Jebb’s final report does not recommend charging any of the above referenced individuals, 
including Sgt. Godere, with untruthfulness. Rather,  Sgt. Godere, Officer CL and Officer TD 
                                                 
8 There were nuanced differences between the testimony of Chief Jebb and Sgt. Godere, including, but not limited  
to, when, during the interview, Sgt. Godere stated his concern abou t being a “rat” and whether he expressed that  
concern once or twice.  My finding represents what I believe to be the most probable exchange.  Regardless, the  
parties both agree that Sgt. Godere, prior to providing the information about the text message exchanges regarding  
the female, first expressed concern about being a “rat” which is the most relevant take -away as it relates to this  
appeal.  
9 Chief Jebb te stified that, during this meeting with then -Chief Ferraro, he (Jebb) recommended charging Sgt.  
 Godere and Officer CL with untruthfulness.  There is no written documentation of this conversation that took place  
approximately eight years ago and I am unabl e to find whether that conversation (regarding untruthfulness) took  
place or not.  Regardless, what is most relevant to this appeal is that then -Chief Ferraro did not want to charge any  
officers with untruthfulness and that Jebb’s report does not recommen d charging any of the officers, including Sgt.  
Godere, with untruthfulness.  11 
 were charged with “incompetence” for “failing to conform to work standards es tablished for 
the officers’ position.” (Exhibit R13)10 
45. Officer MC was not charged with any rule violations. (Exhibit R13)  
46. In April 2012, then -Chief Ferraro issued his disciplinary decisions.  Officer CL was given 
three tours of punishment duty; Sgt. Godere and Officer TD received a written warning; 
Officer MC received no dis cipline. (Exhibits R13; A5 -A7) 
47. Then -Chief Ferraro sent a memorandum dated April 12, 2012 to Sgt. Godere which read as 
follows:  
“As a result of a recent Internal Affairs Investigation, inf ormation surfaced that your use of a 
cell phone during an ongoing investigation although it may or may not have done with ill 
spirit was not consistent with the mission of the Chicopee Police Department.   Your duties 
are to assist in any way possible as r equested or directed by those who were conducting the 
investigation.  There has been no information that you were requested or directed to engage 
in such activity.  
 
It is of the upmost importance that your duties are performed in a professional manner at a ll 
times.  As you know cell phones are allowed on duty for work related activities or 
emergencies.  This correspondence serves as notice to you that should you fail to meet the 
duties and responsibilities of your position in the future a more stringent for m of discipline 
will be administered.  Hopefully you will meet your duties and responsibilities in the 
professional manner of which I know you are capable of performing.  This letter of 
reprimand will be placed in your personnel file.”  
(Exhibit R13)  
 
48. On Ma y 4, 2012, Jebb sent correspondence to Mastroianni  which read in relevant part:   
“On [8/26/11], two uniformed officers while in the performance of their duties took a single 
photograph of the crime scene, which included the homicide victim with their cell ular 
telephone cameras.  It was determined that the officers forwarded this photograph to other 
officers within this department.  All recipients of this photograph were contacted, and stated 
that they deleted the photograph.  At this time, I don’t have any  information that would 
indicate that this photograph is still in existence on any cell phone or social media outlet.  
However during my investigation I was able to retrieve and save this photograph to a disc, 
which will be maintained with [the internal in vestigation file].” (Exhibit A12)  
 
                                                 
10 Sgt. KL, who took a photograph at the scene and forwarded it to Sgt. Godere, was also charged with 
incompetence and received a written war ning.  12 
 49. After imposing his discipline in April 2012, Ferraro retired as Police Chief and Thomas 
Charette was appointed by Mayor Bissonnette as Provisional Police Chief.  Charette served 
provisionally for approximately one year un til he was appointed as Permanent Chief, serving 
in that role until his retirement in July 2014. (Testimony of Chief Charette)  
50. On October 4, 2012, Judge  Mastroianni, still serving as District Attorney at that point in 
time, sent correspondence to Mayor Bis sonnette, stating that he had reviewed Jebb’s internal 
affairs report and was “deeply concerned” about the officers’ behavior.  Relevant excerpts of 
that correspondence  from Judge  Mastroianni to Mayor Bissonnette  are as follows:  
“You have also made me awar e that you are considering further available administration 
action for these officers, in addition to the sanctions imposed by the Police Department 
directly.”  
 
“The officers who took a photograph of the victim created the very interference which they 
were  obligated to protect.  Additionally, by their behavior and later dissemination of the 
photographs, they subjected the victim and family of the victim to a great indignity.”  
 
“Turning to the officer’s behavior during the internal affairs investigation, there is evidence 
of more than one officer’s reluctance to be candid about his activities relating to these 
photographs and a prolonged effort to hide the truth by misleading or false statements and/or 
reports.  Such lack of honesty is very troubling.  In future court proceedings, I will be 
ethically obligated, under mandatory discovery requirements, to produce this material when 
relevant to the question of these officers’ credibi lity.”  
(Exhibit R8)  
 
51. Mayor Bissonnette forwarded Mastroianni’s October 4, 2012 letter to Charette, who was then 
the City’s Police Chief.  Neither Bissonnette nor Charette took any further action at that time 
against the officers referenced in the internal  affairs report. (Testimony of Chief Charette)  
52. On January 10, 2013, Mastroianni issued a memorandum entitled “Discovery Related to 
Certain Chicopee Police Officers” to all assistant district attorneys.  The memorandum 
identified only Officer CL and Sgt. Go dere as individuals who were determined through an 
internal investigation to have made false statements and constructed a process that was to be 13 
 applied in cases that involved either officer.  Specifically, the memorandum indicate d that 
when an assistant d istrict attorney discovers that either officer is a potential witness in a case, 
the assistant district attorney should notify a supervisor and the assistant district attorney and 
supervisor then should determine whether disclosure of the material would be  “relevant” in 
that particular case, a consideration that was to occur “on a case -by-case basis.”  (Exhibit R9)  
53. The memorandum notes the legal proposition, deriving from Brady v. Maryland , 373  
U.S. 83 (1963), that exculpatory material in the possession of a prosecutor’s office is to  
be disclosed to the defense in a criminal prosecution.  (Exhibit R9)   
54. The memorandum also notes some of the limitations on that generalized notion, including 
that exculpatory evidence is evidence that may be used to impeach a “key” prosecution 
witness, that a witness’ “other bad acts generally cannot be used to impeach him/her as a 
witness on the issue of credibility[]” and that a witness’ “prior false testimony in a collateral 
matter is not admissible to impeach him/her.” ( Exhibit R9)  
55. The memorandum concludes by stating that if, upon consideration of those legal principles, 
the assistant district attorney believes the information is subject to production, notification 
was to be made in writing to the Chief of Staff, who would f ollow through on the production 
subject to the execution of a protective order limiting disclosure either through an agreed 
upon protective order or motion practice. (Exhibit R9) 
56. After reviewing relevant parts of the 2012 Internal Affairs report at the Commission hearing 
on March 13, 2019, Judge  Mastroianni concluded that “clearly it appears” that Officer TD 
also gave false information during the investigation and that Officer MC w as also not 
forthcoming during the internal affairs investigation. Having not reviewed those part s of the 
internal affairs investigation in approximately seven years, Judge  Mastroianni could not 14 
 recall how he made the determination to identify Sgt. Godere  (and Officer CL) , but not 
Officer TD or Officer MC.  (Testimony of Judge  Mastroianni)  
57. Judge  Mastroianni did recall, however, particular sections of the internal affairs report that 
concerned him , at the time, about Sgt. Godere , testifying in part that,   
“ … the use of the term not wanting to be a rat led me to the conclusion that his  [Godere]  not 
being forthcoming when initially asked about this was an intentional effort to mislead, to 
avoid having it being the perception that he disclosed something that w ould get another 
officer in trouble … His response to question two was that he does not recall who sent the 
picture.  His response to question three was that ‘I do not recall if I sent this particular picture 
to anyone.’  I don’t believe that. I didn’t bel ieve that.”  
(Testimony of Judge  Mastroianni)   
 
58. Judge  Mastroianni never thought that  his “Brady Letter” regarding Sgt. Godere  created an 
impermeable barrier by which Sgt. Godere never could testify again.  Making it clear that he 
was speaking on his own b ehalf, and not in any current or former official capacity,  
Mastroianni testified that, in a situation like this in which there is advance notice to the 
Department and the District Attorney’s Office, the situation often can be worked around as, 
in the firs t instance, the Police Department can assign the officer to duties that would not call 
upon the officer to testify regularly.  For Mastroianni, an assignment to something like patrol 
duty may limit an officer having to testify regularly.  Further, Mastroia nni testified that the 
specific nature and details of the situation also must be considered in order to evaluate 
whether an officer could be “rehabilitated” in court.  (Testimony of Judge  Mastroianni)   
59.  The January, 2013 memorandum from Mastroianni was pr ovided to Charette.  (Testimony of 
Judge  Mastroianni and Charette)  Charette believes he put a copy of the notice in the 
personnel files of Sgt. Godere and Officer CL , although he could not say with certitude that 
he did so.  (Testimony of Charette)   15 
 60. Sgt. Godere was  not provided with a copy of the internal affairs report at the time and he was 
unaware of the Brady letter .  He did not learn about its existence until 2015. (Testimony of 
Sgt. Godere)  
61. Sgt. Godere never was advised, from an assistant district attorney or from any other source, 
that he was on any so -called Brady list. (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)   
62. Then -Deputy Chief Jebb was unaware that a Brady letter had been issued at the time. 
(Testimony of Jebb)  
63. On at least one occasion after receiving his re primand in 2012, Sgt. Godere recalls testifying 
in an operating under the influence case.  (Testimony   of Sgt. Godere)   
64. Charette discuss ed with Mayor Bissonnette the possibility of additional discipline for the 
officers involved  after receiving the Brady  letter . He questioned whether it was legal to 
impose discipline upon already disciplined officers and Charette sought guidance from the 
Massachusetts Chiefs of Police’s attorney who advised against such action as inappropriate. 
Charette shared his positio n with Mayor Bissonnette and, despite considering the option, 
Mayor Bissonnette ultimately took no further administrative action following Chief Ferraro’s 
disciplinary action and following receipt of the communications from the District Attorney’s 
Office.  (Testimony of Charette)  
2015 Discipline Against Godere Regarding a Separate Matter  
65. As of 2015, Richard Kos was the City’s new mayor ( having defeat ed Bissonnette); Charette 
had retired and Jebb had become the Chief of Police.  (Testimony of Jebb and Charette)  
66. In May 2015, Sgt. Godere was suspended and demoted based upon determinations made by 
Mayor Kos that Sgt. Godere was untruthful, incompetent and neglected his duty in 
connection with his response to a call for service in February, 2015.  (Responde nt Exhibit 2)   16 
 It was at this time that Sgt. Godere first became aware of Jebb’s 2012 internal affairs report. 
(Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
67. Sgt. Godere appealed that decision to the Commission and the Commission issued a decision 
on that appeal on February 4, 2016.  See Sgt. Godere v. City of Chicopee , 29 MCSR 65 
(2016) .  The Commission determined that the charge of untruthfulness was not proven, but 
that Sgt. Godere had failed to meet his responsibilities as a superior officer and thereby 
engaged in conduct  amounting to incompetence and neglect of duty.  Sgt. Godere’s five day 
suspension was affirmed, but his demotion in rank was rescinded and he was returned to th e 
position of police sergeant. (Exhibit R4)  
2017:  Disciplinary Matter Regarding Officer CL tha t Triggered Discussion Re:  Brady Letter  
68. In October 2017, Officer CL was suspended for two days for abuse of sick leave. Officer CL 
appealed the two -day suspension to the Mayor who directed Jebb to provide him with all 
documentation leading up to the susp ension that he could review at the hearing. In the 
process, Jebb spoke to two detectives who were involved in the 2011 homicide investigation 
and one of the detectives made a statement that there was a rumor that Officer CL was the 
subject of a “Brady Lett er.” Subsequently, Jebb had a conversation with the two sergeants 
who are the assigned court officers for the Chicopee District Court. He raised the issue of the 
rumor concerning the “Brady Letter” and both court officers denied having heard anything 
about  it. Jebb contacted the Office of the District Attorney at the Chicopee District Court and 
they denied having any knowledge about a “Brady Letter” pertaining to Officer CL. Jebb 
then contacted the First Assistant District Attorney and inquired about a “Bra dy Letter” 
pertaining to Officer CL.  The First Assistant District Attorney eventually provided Jebb with 
the Brady letter related to both Officer CL and Sgt. Godere. (Testimony of Jebb)  17 
 69. This was the first time that Jebb, who was not the Police Chief in 20 12, learned that Judge  
Mastroianni had issued a “Brady Letter” against Sgt. Godere and Officer CL. (Testimony of 
Jebb)  
70. On November 1, 2017, Captain Lonny Dakin of the Chicopee Police Department sent a letter 
to then and current District Attorney Anthony Gu lluni.  That letter, in its entirety, reads as 
follows:  
“Dear District Attorney,  
While attending the International Chiefs of Police Conference this month, I spoke with a 
number of Massachusetts Chiefs of Police.  One of the discussions related to Internal  Affairs 
Investigations and the Brady decision.  I explained the Sgt. Godere investigation and the 
Civil Service decision.  A Chief recommended making my District Attorney aware of the 
investigation.  
 
I have enclosed the following items related to Sgt. Jef frey Godere for your review and 
awareness:  
 
1.  Internal Affairs Investigation completed on 2/26/2015,  
 
2. Chicopee Mayor Richard J. Kos’s Notice of Disciplinary Decision dated 5/18/2015,  
 
3.  Civil Service Decision – Jeffrey Godere V. City of Chicopee  
 
4.  Brady letter written by Retired District Attorney Mark Mastroianni concerning Jeffrey 
Godere dated 10/04/2012.  
 
The Internal Investigation concluded that Sgt. Jeffrey Godere violated Rules and  
Regulations -Truthfulness, Incompetence and Neglect of Duty.  
 
After a hearing before Mayor Richard J. Kos, Mayor Kos concurred with the investigations  
findings and imposed discipline.  
 
After a Civil Service hearing, Commissioner Christopher C. Bowman wrote a decision.   
Commissioner Bowman addressed the Truthfulness charge starting on page 26 of his  
Decision.  Commissioner Bowman concluded on Page 35 that the City of Chicopee did not  
reach the burden of proof for the Untruthfulness charge.  
 
On page 35 Commissioner Bowman starts to discuss the charges of incompetence and  
neglect of duty.  Commissioner Bowman finds that the City of Chicopee has proven these  
two charges.  In his discussion of his findings Commissioner Bowman writes “ Sgt. Godere  18 
 now tries to cloak his failure to perform his duties and responsibilities t hat day under  
the guise of deferring to an officer’s discretion.  No definition of this concept requires a  
superior  officer to accept a police officer’s account of events which the superior officer  
knows,  through his own observations, is not true .”  (emphasis in original ) 
 
Lastly, while speaking with Chief William Jebb about notifying you of the above, Chief Jebb  
provided me with a Brady letter written by Retired District Attorney Mastroianni.  Chief Jebb  
has an upcoming hearing involving [Officer CL] , so he obtained the document form the court  
today.  Although Chief Jebb completed the investigation that resulted in the letter, he was  
never made aware of the fact that the letter  dealt with more than [Officer CL]’s dishonesty.   
The second Officer’s dis honesty mentioned in the letter is Sgt. Godere.” (Exhibit R16)  
 
71. On November 3, 2017, Jebb penned an email to four members of his command staff stating 
that, on October 16, 2017, he had received copies of the Brady letter regard ing Sgt. Godere 
and Officer C L. Jebb’s email read in part:  
“Now that I am aware of the letter and the fact that two of our officers cannot perform one of 
their most important duties, serving as a credible witness, I must take action to protect the 
credibility of the Chicopee Police De partment and any further investigations … [Officer CL] 
and Sgt. Godere will permanently be assigned to administrative duties from this day forward.  
The officers are not allowed to work overtime or extra details.” (Exhibit R11)  
 
72. That same day, Sgt. Godere received a phone call at home from Captain Gawron,  a member 
of the command staff,  who advised Sgt. Godere that he had been placed on administrative 
duty and read Jebb’s email to Sgt. Godere.  Sgt. Godere was baffled by the development, as 
he was unaware of the Brady letter. (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
73. Within a couple of days, Sgt. Goder e, along with a union representative, met with Jebb at 
which time Je bb discussed creating a position in the Traffic Bureau for Sgt. Godere to which 
Sgt. Godere could be assigned going forward.  (Testimony of Sgt. Godere)  
74. On January 26, 2018, District Attor ney Anthony Gulluni penned a letter to Jebb indicating 
that, “[h]aving reviewed the materials recently provided to me by your department, including 
Mayor Richard Kos’s recent disciplinary decision, the Civil Service decision, and a letter 
dated October 4, 2012 from former District Attorney Mark G. Mastroianni to former Mayor 19 
 Michael Bissonnette,” the statements of Mastroianni “continue to represent the opinions and 
current procedures of the Hampden County District Attorney’s Office.”  (Respondent Exhibit 
10) 
75. During the second day of full hearing, counsel for the City advised on the record that, after 
the first day of hearing, he encountered the First Assistant District Attorney in the 
courthouse; according to the City’s counsel, he was advised by the First A ssistant that 
District Attorney Gulluni had not reviewed the 2012 internal affairs investigative report of 
Jebb because it was his position that he could not revoke the prior Brady letter issued by 
Mastroianni and, therefore, there was no need for him to r eview the original source material 
on the issue.   
76. On July 30, 2018, approximately nine months after Sgt. Godere was placed on administrative 
duties within the station, Sgt. Godere was issued a notice of contemplated discipline by 
Mayor Kos.  (Exhibit R5) 
77. Mayor Kos’s July 30th letter sites the 2012 Brady letter from Mastroianni and also reads in 
part: 
“Furthermore, on January 26, 2018, current District Attorney Anthony Gulluni reviewed 
Chicopee Police Internal Affairs investigation report 11 -05-IA and former District Attorney 
Mark Mastrooianni’s “Brady Letter” and he reaffirmed the reasonable and appropriate 
decision to issue the “Brady Letter” and he reaffirmed it stating you ‘were not candid about 
activities related to the photograph of a murder scene  and engaged in a prolonged effort to 
hide the truth by giving misleading or false statements and/or reports.” (Exhibit R5)  
 
78. On October 15, 2018, a disciplinary hearing was held before Mayor Kos. (Exhibit R7; 
Stipulated Fact)  
79. Via correspondence dated Novem ber 2, 2018, Mayor Kos notified Sgt. Godere that he was 
terminated.  The correspondence read in part:  20 
 “The requirement and expectation for police officers to be truthful is the lynch pin of every 
police officer’s credibility and reliability.  Based upon yo ur testimony at the October 15, 
2018 hearing, as well as reading the exhibits submitted, I agree with the findings of former 
District Attorney Mastorianni and current District Attorney Gulluni that you were untruthful 
and impeded this investigation.” (Exhi bit R7)  
 
Current Status of Officer CL, Officer TD and Officer MC  
80. Officer CL, who faced the same charges as Sgt. Godere, resigned prior to a local hearing 
being held. (Testimony of Jebb)  
81. Officer TD has been assigned to the position of detective in the narco tics bureau. (Testimony 
of Jebb)  
82. Approximately two weeks after Sgt. Godere was terminated, Officer MC was promoted to 
provisional sergeant. (Exhibit A9)  
 Applicable Law  
  G.L. c. 31, § 43 provides:  
“If the commission by a preponderance of the evidence dete rmines that there was just 
cause for an action taken against [a tenured civil service employee] … it shall affirm the 
action of the appointing authority, otherwise it shall reverse such action and the person 
concerned shall be returned to his position with out loss of compensation or other rights; 
provided, however, if the employee by a preponderance of the evidence establishes that 
said action was based upon harmful error in the application of the appointing authority’s 
procedure, an error of law, or upon a ny factor or conduct on the part of the employee not 
reasonably related to the fitness of the employee to perform in his position, said action 
shall not be sustained, and the person shall be returned to his position without loss of 
compensation or other ri ghts.  The commission may also modify any penalty imposed by 
the appointing authority.”  
 
 An action is “justified” if it is “done upon adequate reasons sufficiently supported by 
credible evidence, when weighed by an unprejudiced mind; guided by common sense and by 
correct rules of law .” Commissioners of Civil Service v. Municipal Ct. of Boston , 359 Mass. 
211, 214 (1971) . See also Cambridge v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 300, 304 
(1997); Selectmen of Wakefield v. Judge of First Dist. Ct. , 262 M ass. 477, 482 (1928). The 21 
 Commission determines justification for discipline by inquiring, “whether the employee has been 
guilty of substantial misconduct which adversely affects the public interest by impairing the 
efficiency of public service .” School Co mm. v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 486, 
488 (1997) .  See also Murray v. Second Dist. Ct. , 389 Mass. 508, 514  (1983).  
The Appointing Authority’s burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence is 
satisfied “if it is made to appear more likely or probable in the sense that actual belief in its truth, 
derived from the evidence, exists in the mind or minds of the tribunal notwithstanding any 
doubts that may still linger there .” Tucker v. Pearlstein , 334 Mass. 33, 35-36 (1956).  
Under section 43, th e Commission is required “to conduct a de novo hearing for the purpose 
of finding the facts anew .” Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006) and 
cases cited.  However, “[t]he commission’s task.. .is not to be accomplished on a wholly blan k 
slate. After making its de novo findings of fact, the commission does not act without regard to 
the previous decision of the [appointing authority], but rather decides whether ‘there was 
reasonable justification for the action taken by the appointing aut hority in the circumstances 
found by the commission to have existed when the appointing authority made its decision’,” 
which may include an adverse inference against a complainant who fails to testify at the hearing 
before the appointing authority ” Id., quoting internally from Watertown v. Arria , 16 
Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983) and cases cited.   
By virtue of the powers conferred by their office, police officers are held to a high standard  
of conduct. "Police officers are not drafted into public service; rather, they compete for their 
positions. In accepting employment by the public, they implicitly agree that they will not engage 
in conduct which calls into question, their ability and fitness to perform their official 
22 
 responsibilities." Police Commissione r of Boston v. Civil Service Commission , 22 Mass.App.Ct. 
364, 371 (1986).  
Analysis  
     In 2012, multiple Chicopee police officers engaged in egregious misconduct.  Two police 
officers took an unauthorized photograph of a female murder victim at the scene and forwarded 
those photographs to other Chicopee police officers. Ultimately, a police officer who received 
one of the photographs, showed the photograph of the female to multiple parents at a youth 
sporting event.  
     As stated by the District Attorney  at the time:  “The officers who took a photograph of the 
victim created the very interference which they were obligated to protect.  Additionally, by their 
behavior and later dissemination of the photographs, they subjected the victim and family of the 
victim to a great indignity.”   There is no excuse for the reckless and distasteful actions of the 
police officers involved.  
     Officer CL, who received the photograph from Sgt. Godere and then showed it to parents at 
the youth event , repeatedly denied that he ever received the photograph and/or  that he showed 
the photograph to the parents, even when told by then -Deputy Chief Jebb that reliable 
information contradicted his denials. His actions, including his repeated untruthfulness, 
distinguish him from the o ther officers referenced in Jebb’s internal affairs investigation.  His 
decision to forego a disciplinary hearing and tender his resignation was a prudent one.  
    That leaves three other officers who were shown to be untruthful in Jebb’ s investigation and  
impeded Jebb’s ability to determine who had possession of photographs of a murder scene.  
Officer TD, who took a photograph at the scene and sent it to several police officer in individual 
text message s, stated  that he could not remember who he sent the p hotograph to and also falsely 23 
 claimed that he sent only one group text of the photograph.  Officer MC impeded Jebb’s 
investigation by first telling Jebb that he was “99% sure” that he received the photograph from 
Officer TD, but then, one day later, author ed a letter to Jebb stating that he “could not 
remember” who the message was sent from.  Sgt. Godere, in response to written questions from 
Jebb, initially stated that he could not remember who sent him the photograph or who he sent it 
to.  Although Sgt. G odere eventually provided the information to Jebb during an interview that 
followed, Sgt. Godere expressed reluctance to provide the names of officers out of fear of be 
labeled a “rat”.  
     Prior to being notified of his potential termination in 2018, Sgt . Godere had never had the 
opportunity to dispute the findings of untruthfulness in Jebb’s 2012 investigati ve report, which 
Sgt. Godere was not even aware of until 2015 .  Thus, more than eight years after the alleged 
untruthfulness occurred, the Commission  must determine, as part of this de novo hearing , 
whether those allegations are supported by a preponderance of the evidence.  
      The City argues that Sgt. Godere’s untruthfulness began in November 2011 when, according 
to the City, then -Deputy Chief Jebb  had a one -on-one meeting with Sgt. Godere at which time 
Sgt. Godere denied that he ever received a photograph of the female.  Sgt. Godere adamantly 
denies that any such meeting took place and/or that he ever denied having received the 
photograph of the fe male.  The eight -year interval of time here, and the potential of faded 
memories, makes a finding on this matter challenging.  I believe that Sgt. Godere  has a better 
recollection on this point and I credit his testimony that no such meet ing occurred in No vember 
2011 , in large part because there is no documentation that this conversation occurred, whether in 
Jebb’s internal affairs reports, his multiple emails to Godere regarding this investigation in 2012 
or, even more recently, in communications to the Di strict Attorney’s Office.  There also is no 24 
 reference to it in the termination decision and Mayor Kos could not recall Jebb testifying to it 
during that hearing.  If a November, 2011 meeting occurred, it is likely that it would have been 
included in the Je bb’s internal affairs report.  
     I have found, however, that Sgt. Godere was untruthful in his January 27, 2012 written reply 
to Jebb when he wrote that he could “not recall” who sent him the photograph or to whom he 
sent it.   Sgt. Godere testified that he was only able to recall who sent him the photograph and to 
whom he sent it after he was able to retrieve his cell phone records.  Jebb did not believe that.  
Judge  Mastroianni did not believe that.  Mayor Kos did not believe that.  Neither do I.  
      I listened carefully to Sgt. Godere’s testimony at the hearing and reviewed the written 
transcript of that testimony as well.  At a minimum, it is not plausible that, in January 2012, Sgt. 
Godere was unable to recall who sent him the photograph of the femal e on the night of August 
26, 2011 without first checking his phone records.  Sgt. Godere, for the first time in his career, 
had been called to the scene in which he discovered a murder victim.  That same night , while 
back at the police station, a fellow po lice sergeant, who was the officer in charge that night, 
showed Sgt. Godere a graphic picture of the murder victim that the sergeant had taken at the 
scene.  Sgt. Godere looked at the photograph on the sergeant’s phone and asked the sergeant to 
send it to him, which the sergeant did almost immediately.  In that context, it is inconceivable to 
me that Sgt. Godere, in January 2012, could not recall who sent him the photograph without first 
checking his phone records.  Rather, the more plausible explanation is  that Sgt. Godere, rather 
than assisting Jebb in his critical investigation, chose to be untruthful in an effort to avoid 
implicating another police officer.  Finally, while he did eventually provide truthful information 
to Jebb during the February 2, 2012  interview and follow -up correspondence, he needed to be 
prodded to do so after expressing concerns about being labeled as a “rat”.   Sgt. Godere’s conduct 25 
 was a violation of the rules and regulations of the Police Department regarding untruthfulness 
and co nstituted substantial misconduct which adversely affected the public interest.  
   Having determined that Sgt. Godere  did engage in the alleged misconduct, I must  
determine whether the level of discipline (termination) was warranted.  
     As stated by the SJC in Falmouth v. Civ. Serv. Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 -825 (2006):  
      “After making its de novo findings of fact, the commission must pass judgment  
on the penalty imposed by the appointing authority, a role to which the statute  
 speaks directly.  G.L. c. [31], s. § 43 (‘The commission may also modify any  
 penalty imposed by the appointing authority.’)  Here the commission does  
 not act without regard to the previous decision of the [appointing authority],  
but rather decides whe ther ‘there was reasonable justification for the action taken by  
the appointing authority in the circumstances found by the commission to have  
existed when the appointing authority made its decision.” Id. citing  Watertown v.  
Arria ,16 Mass.App.Ct. 331, 33 4 (1983).  
 
 “Such authority to review and amend the penalties of the many disparate  
 appointing authorities subject to its jurisdiction inherently promotes the  
 principle of uniformity and the ‘equitable treatment of similarly situated  
 individuals.’ ci ting Police Comm’r of Boston v. Civ. Serv. Comm’n , 39 
 Mass.App.Ct. 594, 600 (1996).  However, in promoting these principles,  
 the commission cannot detach itself from the underlying purpose of the  
 civil service system — ‘to guard against political considerations, favoritism  
 and bias in governmental employment decisions.” Id. (citations omitted).  
 
 -- 
 
 “Unless the commission’s findings of fact differ significantly from those reported  
 by the town or interpret the relevant law in a substantially dif ferent way, the  
 absence of political considerations, favoritism or bias would warrant essentially  
 the same penalty.  The commission is not free to modify the penalty imposed by  
 the town on the basis of essentially similar fact finding without an adequate  
 explanation.” Id. at 572. (citations omitted).  
 
        Similar to the City, I have found that Sgt. Godere was untruthful as part of an internal 
investigation in 2012.  Several  factors, however, warrant a modification of the penalty imposed 
here.  My explanation follows.  26 
      The City was aware of Sgt. Godere’s untruthfulness in 2012 and, after careful review and 
consideration, chose not to charge Sgt. Godere with untruthfulness .  Rather, they charged Sgt. 
Godere with incompetence and issued him a written reprimand. As he was not charged with 
untruthfulness, and was not provided with a copy of Jebb’s internal affairs report, Sgt. Godere 
had no ability at the time to refute the ch arge at that time .  There is something inherently wrong 
with basing discipline on untruthfulness that the City has been aware of for seven years .  
     Further , Sgt. Godere has been treated differently than other similarly situated individuals.  
Two other police officers engaged in the same misconduct as Sgt. Godere.  Officer TD took a 
photograph of the female victim, was not forthcoming about who he sent it to and was also 
untruthful when he stated that he sent out one group text, as opposed to sending the  picture via 
several separate text messages.  Officer MC at first acknowledged that he was “99% sure” that 
he received the photograph from Officer TD, but then submitted correspondence stating that he 
could no longer remember who sent it to him.  Sgt. Gode re has been terminated.  Officer TD has 
been assigned to the position of detective in the narcotics division.  Officer MC has been 
promoted to provisional sergeant.   At the hearing, Chief Jebb sought to distinguish their 
misconduct from Sgt. Godere’s by st ating that one of those officers was untruthful because he 
didn’t want to share the photographs of a romantic partner that were on his phone and the other 
didn’t want to share the photographs of family members.  Even if I were to accept this head -
scratchin g rationale, it ignores the fact that their untruthfulness was based their unforthcoming 
answers during the interview, as opposed to their reluctance to turn over pictures from their cell 
phones.  
     Finally, the City’s reliance on the fact that Sgt. Gode re was the subject of a Brady letter is 
problematic for multiple reasons.  First, as previously referenced, the City’s Mayor (Bissonnette) 27 
 and Police Chief (Charette) at the time (2012) were both aware that Sgt. Godere was the subject 
of a Brady Letter and  concluded that no disciplinary action was warranted.  Effectively, what the 
City is arguing here is that the election of a new Mayor or the  appointment of a new Police Chief 
can result in the reversal of prior decisions not to discipline a permanent, tenu red civil service 
employee based on the same information that was available to their predecessors.  The civil 
service system was designed to prevent  these types of arbitrary decisions.   
     Second, Sgt. Godere was not informed of the 2012 Brady letter at  the time.  Over several 
years, it appears that many people, except Sgt. Godere , were aware of the Brady Letter.  The 
District Attorney, with the assistance of the First District Attorney, wrote the letter and 
forwarded it to the Police Chief  in 2012  The Police Chief shared the letter with the Mayor at the 
time.  Years later, the new Police Chief was informed of a “rumor” of such a letter.  The new 
Police Chief receives the letter from the First District Attorney.  The Police Chief then notifies 
his comman d staff of the letter .  Only then, after six years, did Sgt. Godere learn that he was the 
subject of a Brady Letter, when a Captain called him at home and notified him about the Police 
Chief’s email.  Similar to the City’s failure to provide Sgt. Godere wi th the internal affairs report 
in 2012, there is an unfairness in requiring Sgt. Godere to defend allegations the City was aware 
of six years prior.  
     Third, the City’s Mayor testified that he principally relied upon the conclusion of the District 
Attor ney’s Office in making his termination decision on Sgt. Godere and stated that, if others 
had been named in the Brady memorandum, they would be in th e same position as Sgt. Godere.  
As referenced previously, the author of that Brady Letter could not explai n why Officer TD and 
MC were not name d in the letter.   Mayor Kos also testified that a basis for his determination was  
his conclusion that no officer, including Sgt. Godere, could effectively serve as a police officer 28 
 on a going forward basis if they are the subject of a Brady Letter, as, according to Mayor Kos, 
the finding would render  him either unable to testify or wrecked his credibility.  As explained, 
that is not an opinion shared by the author of the memorandum, then-District Attorney  
Mastroianni.   
     For all of the above reasons, a downward modification of the penalty imposed here is 
warranted.  In determining the appropriate level of discipline, I considered other relevant factors, 
including:  the seriousness of the misconduct; Sgt. Godere’s pri or discipline; and the insights 
offered by Judge  Mastroianni regarding the potential challenges associated with the continued 
employment of a police officer who is the subject of a Brady Letter.  
    The appeal is allowed in part  and the modified penalty is  as follows:  
1. Sgt. Godere shall b e demoted from sergeant to police officer, effective November 2, 2018.  
2. Sgt. Godere shall be returned to his position of police officer, effective November 2, 2018,  
without loss of compensation or other rights.  
Civil Service  Commission  
 
 
/s/ Christopher Bowman  
Christopher C. Bowman  
Chairman  
 
By vote of the Civil Service Commission (Bowman, Chairman; Ittleman; Stein and Tivnan, 
Commissioners  [Camuso – Absent] ) on February 13, 2020.  
 
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration within ten days of the receipt of this Commission order or 
decision.   Under the pertinent provisions of the Code of Mass. Regulations, 801 CMR 1.01 (7) (1), the motion must 
identify a clerical or mechanica l error in this order or decision or a significant factor the Agency or the Presiding 
Officer may have overlooked in deciding the case.  A motion for reconsideration does not  toll the statutorily 
prescribed thirty -day time limit for seeking judicial review  of this Commission order or decision.  
 
Under the provisions of G.L. c. 31, § 44, any party aggrieved by this Commission order or decision may initiate  
proceedings for judicial review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior court within thirty (30) days a fter receipt of 
this order or decision.  Commencement of such proceeding shall not, unless specifically ordered by the court, 
operate as a stay of this Commission order or decision.  After initiating proceedings for judicial review in the 
Superior Court, t he plaintiff, or his/her attorney, is required to serve a copy of the summons and complaint upon the 
Boston office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, with a copy to the Civil Service Commission, in the 
time and in the manner prescribed by Mass.R. Civ.P. 4 (d).  29 
 Notice to:  
Andrew J. Gambaccini , Esq. (for Appellant)  
Thomas J. Rooke , Esq.  (for Respondent)  