1 
 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
 
SUFFOLK, SS.       CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
        One Ashburton Place, Room 503  
        Boston, MA 02108  
        (617) 727 -2293  
 
 
DAVID M. GOULD , 
 Appellant  
 
v.        D1-17-025 
 
TOWN OF NORTH ATTLEBOROUGH,  
 Respondent  
 
 
Appearance for Appellant :     Leigh Panettiere, Esq.  
        Sandulli Grace, P.C.  
44 School Street, Suite 1100  
Boston , MA 02 108 
 
Appearance for Respondent:      Wendy Chu, Esq.  
        Brian Magner, Esq.1 
        Deutsch Williams Brooks DeRensis  
             & Holland, P.C.  
        One Design Center Place, Suite 600  
        Boston, MA 02210  
         
Commissioner:       Christopher C. Bowman  
 
 
SUMMARY OF DECISION  
 
     The Town has proven, by a preponderance of the evidence, that Sgt. Gould:  a) engaged in 
domestic violence by striking his live -in girlfriend during a domestic dispute; and b) punched an 
off-duty police officer when he found him kissing his girlfriend.  Sg t. Gould’s serious 
misconduct falls far short of the high standards required of all police officers and justified the 
Town’s decision to terminate his employment from the Police Department.  
                                                 
1 Attorney Magner subsequently filed a notice of withdrawal of counsel as he obtained other employment 
subsequent to the full hearing.   2 DECISION  
 
     On February 3, 2017, Sgt. Gould , David M. Gould (S gt. Gould), p ursuant to G.L. c. 31, § § 42 
(Procedural Issues’ Appeal) and 43 (Just Cause Appeal) , filed an appeal with the Civil Service 
Commission (Commission), contesting the decision of the Town of North Attleborough (Town), 
to terminate him from h is po sition as a Police Sergeant in the Town’s Police Department 
(NAPD) effective January 27, 2017.  The appeal was timely filed  and I held a pre-hearing 
conference at the offices of the Commission on February 24, 2017.  The first three days of the 
full hearing  were held on May 1, 2017, May 2, 2017, and July12, 2017 at the Town ’s 
Department of Public Works (DPW), Public Meeting Room.  The fourth day of the full hearing 
was held on July 30, 2017 at the offices of the Commission.  The last day of the full hearing was 
held on August 29, 2017 at the DPW Public Meeting Room.2  As no written notice was received 
from either party, the hearing was declared private  and all witnesses were sequestered .  A 
stenographer was present at all five days of the hearing and the part ies agreed that the 
stenographic transcripts would serve as the official record of the proceedings.  Following the 
close of the hearing, proposed decisions were submitted by both parties on November 14, 2017 . 
FINDINGS OF FACT  
     Fifty -five (55) exhibits were entered into evidence by the Appointing Authority (Appointing 
Authority Exhibits 1 -55) and fifty-two (52) exhibits were entered into evidence by Sgt. Gould  
                                                 
2 The Standard Adjudicatory rules of Practice and Procedures, 810 CMR §§ 1.00, et seq ., apply to adjudications 
before the  Commission, with G.L. Chapter 31, or any Commission rules, taking precedence.   3 (Appellant Exhibits 1 -4, 5(A) -5(D), 6(A) -6(F), 7(A) -7(J), 8 -21(A)3, 22-24, 25(A) -25(B), 26 -34).  
Based on the records submitted and the testimony of the following witnesses4: 
Called by the Town : 
 Chief John Reilly, North Attleborough Police Department ; 
 Captain Joseph DiRenzo, North Attleborough Police Department ; 
 Detective, Plainville Police Departm ent (Plainville Detective)  
 Jane Doe’s Sister ; 
 Police Officer, Plainville Police Department (Plainville Police Officer) ; 
 Deputy Police Chief, Wrentham Police Department;  (Wrentham Deputy Chief)  
 Jane Doe’s friend ; 
Called by Sgt. Gould : 
 Local Union President, North Attleborough Police Department;  
 Jane Doe’s Ex -Husband;  
 Selectman, Town of North Attleborough;  
 David Gould, Appellant;  
 Jane Doe, Mr. Gould’s live -in girlfriend ; 
and taking administrative notice of all matters filed in the case,  pertinent statutes, regulations, 
policies, stipulations and reasonable inferences from the credible evidence, a preponderance of 
the evidence establishes the following:  
 
                                                 
3 The parties agreed that the document submitted by Sgt. Gould labeled “Exhibit 21(B)” is merely a chalk and is not 
an exhibit in these proceedings.  
4 To the extent possible, I have not used the names of the witnesses who testified before the Commission based, in 
part, to protect the privacy of Jane Doe notwithstanding the fact that published reports, submitted as exhibits in this 
proceeding, have opted to identify Jane Doe.     4 1. David Gould was a tenured civil service employee of the NAPD .  He was terminated 
effective January 27, 2017.  At the time of his termination, he had been employed by the 
NAPD for twenty -eight (28) years and held the rank of Police Sergeant . (Stipulated Facts; 
Testimony of Appellant; Appointing Authority Exhibit 2 .) 
2. Prior to his termination, Sgt. Gould had never been formally disciplined by the NAPD , but 
had received multiple “training letters” .  
3. Sgt. Gould’s father previously served as the Town’s Police Chief for many years.  One of 
Sgt. Gould’s brother  is currently  a lieutenant at the NAPD and another brother is a special 
police officer  with the NAPD . (Testimony of Appellant)  
4. Sgt. Gould ha s a romantic partnership and live s with Jane Doe, who is a Plainville police 
officer.  They have liv ed together continuously in M s. Doe’s house in Wrentham  since 2014 , 
except for a brief period of time when Sgt. Gould  moved out of the home around the time of 
the incident at issue herein. (Testimony of Appellant .) 
5. On Thursday, July 28, 2016, Sgt. Gould and Ms. Doe  had an argument dur ing which Sgt. 
Gould asked Mr. Doe if she had another boyfriend.  (Testimony of Appellant .) 
6. The following day, Friday, July 29, 2016, Sgt. Gould  and Ms. Doe  both worked a 4:00 p.m. 
to midnight shift with their respective police departments.  After completin g his shift, Sgt. 
Gould  returned home, but found that Ms. Doe  was not there.  By approximately 1:00 a.m., 
when she still had not come home, Sgt. Gould w ent out in search of Ms. Doe .  Although she 
did not inform him of her whereabouts, Sgt. Gould correctly determined that Ms. Doe  was at 
a “pub” ( the pub ) in Plainville, MA.  (Testimony of Appellant .) 
7. Sgt. Gould drove into the parking lot located behind the pub  and found Ms. Doe ’s vehicle  
parked in the back .  He did not enter the pub , but chose inste ad to exit the pub ’s parking lot ,  5 drive down the road , and park in the parking lot of a pediatric dental office located on the 
other side of the street  approximately 100 yards from  the pub .  There, he sat in his vehicle 
and watched for Ms. Doe  to leave the pub. (Testimony of Appellant .) 
8. After a period of time , Sgt. Gould observed Ms. Doe ’s vehicle exit the parking lot of the pub .  
Directly behind her vehicle was another vehicle  driven by a Plainville Detective5.  Sgt. Gould  
quickly realized that the second vehicle was following Ms. Doe  out of the pub .  Sgt. Gould  
then pulled out of  the parking lot  and followed the two cars at a bit of a distance.  (Testimony 
of Appellant .) 
9. Ms. Doe  and the Plainville Detective  drove down Route 1 (in Plainville ), turned left at the 
intersection of Route 1 and Taunton Street, and then turned right onto Old Taunton Street.  
Sgt. Gould  got stuck at the traffic light at the intersection of Route 1 and Taunton Street and 
did not see  them take the right -hand turn onto Old Taunton Street.  Sgt. Gould  drove all the 
way down Taunton Street until just before the Wrentham Common, a distance of 
approximately three miles.  He then turned around and drove on Taunton Street back towards 
Route 1.  At some point during this drive,  Sgt. Gould  correctly determined that Ms. Doe  and 
the Plainville Detective  had turned down Old Taunt on Street and he followed suit.  W hen he 
came upon Ms. Doe  and the Plainville Detective , his vehicle was facing their vehicles, which 
were pulled over on th e side of the road.   (Testimony of Appellant; Testimony of Plainville 
Detective ; Testimony of Ms. Doe ) 
10. Sgt. Gould  observed Ms. Doe  and the Plainville Detective  kissing one another when he 
arrived on Old Taunton Street.   (Testimony of Appellant .) 
                                                 
5 At that particular moment in time, Sgt. Gould did not know that it was the Plainville Detective driving the second 
vehicle.  (Testimony of Appellant.)   6 11. Sgt. Gould  stopped his vehicle and ran towards Ms. Doe  and the Plainville Detective .  He 
was visibly angry.  He yelled obscenities at them and called the Plainville Detective  a 
“fucking asshole” and Ms. Doe  names such as “slut” and “whore .”  Sgt. Gould  punched the 
Plainville Detective  on the left side of his face.   Thereafter, Ms. Doe  drove off and Sgt. 
Gould  got into his vehicle and followed her to their home in Wrentham.  (Testimony of 
Appellant; Testimony of Plainville Detective ; Testimony of Ms. Doe ; Appointing Authority 
Exhibits 7, 8, 24. 
12. When Sgt. Gould  and Ms. Doe  arrived at their home, Ms. Doe  pulled into the garage.  Sgt. 
Gould  parked his truck in the driveway.   Sgt. Gould  entered the garage  before Ms. Doe  
exited her vehicle.  (Testimony of Appellant; Testim ony of Ms. Doe ; Appointing Authority 
Exhibits 7, 8 ) 
13. Once inside the garage, Sgt. Gould  immediately began yell ing at Ms. Doe .  Sgt. Gould  
resumed calling her names such as “slut” and “whore.”   (Testimony of Appellant and Ms. 
Doe)  
14. The verbal argument continu ed as they proceeded from the garage into the breezeway 
connecting the garage to the house  and from the breezeway into the kitchen .  At some point, 
while Ms. Doe  and Sgt. Gould  were inside the kitchen, Sgt. Gould  grabbed Ms. Doe ’s face 
with one hand, turned her face so she would be looking at him, and held her head in place 
while he continued to yell at her.  After a few moments  of this , Ms. Doe  “walked through” 
Sgt. Gould  into the living room.  (Testimony of Ms. Doe )6 
                                                 
6 “Ms. Doe:   … I didn’t want to listen to him anymore and he took my face and he made me listen to him scream all 
the things he had heard about me … I was looking away.  I didn’t want to listen to it.  I said, ‘I don’t want to do this.  
Just get some things.’ And he had my face and was making me listen to him calling me a slut, a whore.” Transcript, 
Volume V, pp. 127 -128. 
 
“Counsel:  Did you have any trouble moving your face away from his hand?  
  7 15. Shortly be fore 2:20 a.m., Sgt. Gould  sent a text message to three officers of the Plainville 
Police Department (including “The Plainville Police Officer” who testified before the 
Commission)  with words to the effect of “I just caught [Ms. Doe]  fucking [the Plainvill e 
Police Detective] .”  Sgt. Gould told Ms. Doe that he had just sent the text message. 
(Testimony of Appellant)  
16. The Plainville Police Officer who testified before the Commission was the only individual to 
reply to Sgt. Gould ’s message.  Thereafter, Sgt. Gould  called the Plainville Police Officer on 
the phone  and t hey spoke until approximately 3:00 a.m.  During this call, Sgt. Gould  told the 
Plainville Police Officer that: (i) he had seen Ms. Doe  kissing the Plainville Detective  on Old 
Taunton Street, ( ii) he had punched the Plainville Detective , but the Plainville Detective  
would not fight, ( iii) the Plainville Detective  was a “fucking pussy,” ( iv) he had fought with 
Ms. Doe  and needed to find a new place to live , (v) Ms. Doe  had a constant need to be the 
center of attention, and ( vi) he had suspected her of cheating on him because she had 
received flowers at work.  During th e call, Sgt. Gould  sounded upset and the Plainville Police 
Officer told Sgt. Gould not to do anything s tupid. (Testimony of Appellant; Testimony of 
Plainville Police Officer .) 
17. Sgt. Gould spent the rest of the night (morning) at his son’s house. (Testimony of Appellant)  
18. Between approximately 2:15 a.m. and 9:30 A.M.  that morning (Saturday, July30th), Ms. Doe  
took several photographs  of various locations in her home, including three (3)  pictures that 
                                                                                                                                                             
Ms. Doe:  I don’t remember trying to.  I just remember letting him vent it out.  On some level I felt I owed it to him 
to listen to it.”  Transcript, Volume V, p. 13 7. 
 
In response to a question regarding whether alcohol impaired her memory, Ms. Doe stated:  “Well, I don’t think I 
was so drunk that I wouldn’t remember if I was punched in the face, in the nose, to have my nose broken.  If I 
remember, you know meeting [ the Plainville Detective] across the street after that allegedly happened or Dave 
grabbing my face  and recalling a lot of things he said, I would remember a punch to the face which would give me a 
broken nose.  I didn’t have a bloody nose.  I didn’t have a ny broken bones ….” Transcript, Volume V, pp. 164 -165. 
  8 show :  a) a shelf lying on the floor, adjacent to a couple of couches ; and b) framed 
photographs lying on the floor near the fallen shelf . (Testimony of Ms. Doe)   The shelf 
shown in the photograph s had previously been affixed to a wall in the living room on the first 
floor of the house.  (Testimony of Appellant .) 
19. At some point during the overnight hours  of July 29 -30, 2016 , after Sgt. Gould  had left the 
house , Ms. Doe met with  the Plainville Detective  in his vehicle and told him that Sgt. Gould  
had hit her and that she would be contacting her friend, the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief.7  
(Appointing Authority Exhibit 13)  
20. On Saturday, July 30, 2016, between 8:28 a.m. and 8:38 a.m., Ms. Doe  sent a text message to 
Sgt. Gould stating, in part, that she was planning on filing a police report with photographs. 
(Testimony of Appellant)   
21. On Saturday, July 30, 2016, between 8:40 a.m. and 9:04 a.m., Ms. Doe  sent a text message to 
the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief stating, in part, that she thought that Sgt. Gould may have 
broken her nose last night. (Testimony of Wrentham Deputy Police Chief)  
22. On Saturday, July 30, 2016, between 10:02 a.m. and 10:12 a.m., Ms. Doe  sent Sgt. Gould a  
text message stating in part, “you beat me last night.  I seriously have a broken nose.” 
(Testimony of Appellant)   
23. On July 30, 2016, sometime in the late morning or early afternoon, Ms. Doe  met face -to-face 
with the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief to discus s the events from the previous night.  Ms. 
Doe told Deputy Chief McGrath that  Sgt. Gould had punched the Plainville Detective when 
                                                 
7 Ms. Doe testified that she likely used words like “brawl” and “big fight” when describing what had happened to 
the Plainville Detective.  The Plainville Detective testified before the Commission tha t Ms. Doe told him there was 
an altercation and that something had happened between Ms. Doe and Sgt. Gould, but he could not recall her exact 
words.  I reviewed the audio / video recording of the Plainville Detective’s interview with Captain DiRenzo and th e 
the State Trooper.  During that interview, the Plainville Detective explicitly stated that Ms. Doe told him that Sgt. 
Gould had “hit” her.  It is painfully clear to me that the Plainville Detective, during his sworn testimony before the 
Commission, was, once again, seeking to downplay what he heard or saw that night, despite having already 
acknowledged during his taped interview that Ms. Doe told him that Sgt. Gould had hit her that night.   9 he showed up at the location where Ms. Doe and the Plainville Detective were meeting; and, 
after Sgt. Gould and Ms. Doe retur ned home, Sgt. Gould “pulled her out of the car, was 
screaming at her and hit her.”  Ms. Doe told the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief that she 
thought her nose was broken and attributed it to her physical confrontation with Sgt. Gould. 
(Testimony of Wrentham Deputy Police Chief)  
24. During their meeting in the late morning of July 30th, the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief 
didn’t see any marks on Ms. Doe’s nose, nor did he see any bruising or black eyes. 
(Testimony of Wrentham Deputy Police Chief)  
25. During this meeting,  the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief suggested that Ms. Doe get a 
restraining order, file a police report and have Sgt. Gould charged with domestic assault and 
battery.  Ms. Doe stated that she didn’t want Sgt. Gould to lose his job and declined his 
suggestio ns.  The Wrentham Deputy Police Chief and Ms. Doe th en discussed sending Sgt. 
Gould an “informal restraining order” to persuade Sgt. Gould to leave the house. (Testimony 
of Wrentham Deputy Police Chief)  
26. Later that day (Saturday, July 30th), Sgt. Gould rece ived a text message from Ms. Doe telling 
him, in part, that there was a report on file with photographs and that if he didn’t come by the 
house and remove his things the next day  (Sunday) , she would file a complaint and request a 
restraining order. (Testim ony of Appellant)  
27. On the night of July 30, 2016, Ms. Doe  spoke to her friend (Ms. Doe’s Friend) and told her 
that Sgt. Gould  had hit her ; that she thought she had a broken nose, which Ms. Doe attributed 
to the physical fight with Sgt. Gould.  Ms. Doe  asked her friend how her nose appeared and 
her friend i ndicated that it appeared crooked. (Testimony of Ms. Doe’s friend )  10 28. On Sunday, July 31, 2016 at 10:47 A.M., Ms. Doe sent a text message to Sgt. Gould stating:  
“Will you come away with us on the 14th to the  19th.” (Appointing Authority Exhibit 24, p. 
1115)   That same day, with the permission of Ms. Doe, Sgt. Gould visited the house and 
removed some of his belongings. (Testimony of Appellant)  
29. Also on July 31, 2016, between 11:49 a.m. and 12:23 p.m., Ms. Doe ’s sister received a text 
message from Ms. Doe stating in part that she and Sgt. Gould had  “a huge fight, Dave 
actually broke my nose."   (Testimony of Ms. Doe’s Sister)    
30. Sometime after the above -referenced text message exchange , Ms. Doe  and her sister spok e 
on the telephone  the same day .  During this call, Ms. Doe  told her  sister that Sgt. Gould had 
put her in a choke hold, that there was “choking”; “struggling”; and “pulling” by Sgt. Gould. 
(Testimony of Ms. Doe’s Sister)  
31. Also on Sunday, July 31st, Ms. Doe’s ex -husband, an Attleboro police detective, visited the 
home in Wrentham.  Ms. Doe told her ex -husband about an argument she had with Sgt. 
Gould, but she did not say that Sgt. Gould hit or injured here.  Ms. Doe’s ex -husband did not 
observe any injuri es on Ms. Doe at that time. (Testimony of Ms. Doe’s ex -husband)  
32. A few days after July 3 1, 2016, the Plainville Police Officer (who Sgt. Gould spoke with on 
the phone on July 30th) sent Ms. Doe a text message asking how she was doing.  Ms. Doe’s 
response wa s “I’m fine other than maybe a broken nose” or words to that effect.  (Testimony 
of Plainville Police Officer; Appointing Authority Exhibit 9)  
33. On Wednesday, August 3, 2016, Ms. Doe ’s brother, a Wrentham Police Sergeant, became 
aware of allegations that Sgt . Gould had hit his sister on July 30th.  (Appointing Authority 
Exhibit 9)   Ms. Doe and her brother exchanged text messages in which Ms. Doe’s brother  11 stated that he wanted to report the allegations to the Wrentham Police Chief.  Ms. Doe asked 
him not to c ontact anyone. (Appointing Authority Exhibits 7, 23)  
34. Later on August 3rd, Ms. Doe’s brother met with the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief who his 
sister (Ms. Doe) had met with on the morning of Saturday, July 30th. (Appointing Authority 
Exhibit 9)  
35. That same da y, the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief filed a report regarding his conversation 
with Ms. Doe on the morning of July 30th.  The report stated that Ms. Doe had reported to 
him that Sgt. Gould had beat her and hit her in the face and that she believed her nose was 
broken. (Appointing Authority Exhibit 9 and Testimony of Wrentham Deputy Police Chief)  
36. On August 4, 2016, a Plainville Police Lt. asked Ms. Doe, who is a Plainville Police Officer, 
to return to the station.  (Appointing Authority Exhibit 9)  
37. At or around  the same time8, Ms. Doe sent a text message to her sister stating:  “Not a word 
of what I said to you about me and Dave or anyone else from this point on.  I just got called 
into the lieutenants office …” (Appointing Authority Exhibit 19)   
38. The lieutenant explained to Ms. Doe that he had become aware of allegations that Sgt. Gould 
had punched the Plainville Police Officer and Ms. Doe on or about July 30th.   Ms. Doe told 
the Lt. that she did not want to discuss her personal life and denied seeing Sgt. Gould  punch 
the Plainville Police Officer.   The Lt.’s report states that he did not observe any signs of 
injury on Ms. Doe. (Appointing Authority Exhibit 9)  
39. At or around the same time, Ms. Doe sent a text message to her sister stating:  “I denied all of 
it.” (Appointing Authority Exhibit 19)  
                                                 
8 The extraction report in Exhibit 19 states that this text messa ge was sent on August 3rd.  I infer that either the 
August 3rd date is incorrect or the August 4th date in the Plainville Police Lt.’s report is incorrect.   12 40. On Monday, August 8, 2016, the Wrentham Police Chief contacted the NAPD to inform 
them of the report written by the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief  (received five days earlier) , 
which referenced allegations that Sgt. Gould (of  the NAPD), had hit his girlfriend and a 
Plainville Police Officer on July 30th. (Appointing Authority Exhibit 8)  
41. On Tuesday, August 9th, the North Attleborough Police Chief directed NAPD Police Captain 
Joseph DiRenzo to initiate an investigation.  Sgt. Go uld was placed on administrative leave 
the same day. (Appointing Authority Exhibit 7 and Testimony of Cap tain DiRenzo)  
42. Also on August 9th, Chief Reilly suspended Sgt. Gould’s license to carry a firearm (LTC)  
2016, which Sgt. Gould failed to appeal.  (Testimony of Chief Reilly ; Appointing Authority 
Exhibit 55 )   
43. Over the next several weeks, Cap tain DiRenzo conducted an investigation, meeting with 
and/or interviewing:  two (2) Police Chiefs; a Deputy Police Chi ef; Ms. Doe’s sister; the 
Plainville Police Officer who Sgt. Gould called on July 30th; the Plainville Police Detective 
who was punched by Sgt. Gould; Ms. Doe’s brother; Ms. Doe’s friend; a former boyfriend of 
Ms. Doe; and two (2) other friends of Ms. Doe .  (Appointing Authority Exhibit 7)  
44. On August 11, 2016, the Wrentham Police Department filed a criminal complaint against 
Sgt. Gould for Domestic Assault and Battery. (Testimony of Appellant)  
45. On August 12, 2016, Sgt. Gould appeared at the Wrentham Police S tation; was arrested and 
brought to Wrentham District Court for arraignment. (Testimony of Appellant)  
46. The Appellant’s criminal counsel asked the District Court judge to “dismiss [the] complaint 
prior to arraignment and have the Wrentham Police Department take the proper avenues and 
set it up for a clerk’s hearing.”  Based largely on the amount of time that had passed since  13 Ms. Doe first reported the matter to the Wrentham Deputy Police Chief, the District Court 
Judge dismissed the criminal complaint withou t prejudice. (Appellant  Exhibit 7J)   
47. A special prosecutor was appointed by the Norfolk County District Attorney’s office and 
new criminal charges were filed against the Appellant for domestic assault and battery 
against Ms. Doe and assault and battery agai nst the Plainville Police Officer  and disorderly 
conduct . (Testimony of Chief Reilly  and Appellant Exhibit 7F ) 
48. On September 14, 2016, a Clerk Magistrate’s hearing was held in Dedham District Court  and 
the Clerk Magistrate found  probable cause regarding the  criminal charges. (Appellant Exhibit 
7F) 
49. On September 28, 2016, Captain DiRinenzo completed his internal investigation, which was 
later amended after interviewing a neighbor who allegedly witnessed the incident on Old 
Taunton Road between Ms. Doe, the Pla inville Detective and Sgt. Gould. (Appointing 
Authority Exhibit 7)  
50. On September 30, 2016, NAPD Chief Reilly, based on the internal investigation completed 
by Captain DiRenzo, forwarded correspondence to the Town’s Board of Selectmen 
recommending that the B oard terminate Sgt. Gould’s employment. The Police Chief’s letter 
to the Board of Selectmen stated that:  a) Sgt. Gould hit the Plainville Detective in the face; 
b) Sgt. Gould, after returning home, pulled Ms. Doe from the car, screamed at her and hit her 
repeatedly, inflicting bodily harm; and c) Sgt. Gould was facing criminal charges for these 
alleged acts. (Appointing Authority Exhibit 5)  
51. On October 2, 2016, the Board of Selectmen sent Sgt. Gould a “Notice of Intent to Discharge 
and Appointing Authority Hearing” notifying him that they had designated a hearing officer  14 who would conduct a local hearing on October 21st, which, for logistical reasons, was moved 
to November 4th. (Appointing Authority Exhibit 4  and Appellant Exhibit 7D ) 
52. On November 2, 2016, co unsel for Sgt. Gould filed a “motion for continuance” with the 
Board of Selectmen, asking the Board to continue the November 4th local hearing “for a 
sufficient amount of time to allow the accused employee to resolve the pending criminal case 
against him, so that he will feel free to testify in this matter without relinquishing his 5th 
Amendment Rights.”   The “motion” referenced that “Sgt. Gould has even offered to go off 
the payroll so that the delay does not burden the Town financially.” (Appellant Exhib it 6D)  
53. On November 3, 2016, the Board of Selectmen, at a regularly scheduled meeting, addressed 
the request for continuance.  After a spirited conversation, the Board agreed to postpone the 
November 4th hearing to January 1, 2017 or the resolution of the pending criminal matters, 
whichever came sooner . (Appellant Exhibit 20)  Per agreement of the parties, Sgt. Gould’s 
paid leave was converted to unpaid leave during this period of time.  
54. On November 23, 20 16, the Board of Selectmen notified Sgt. Gould that the re-scheduled 
local hearing w ould take place on January 6, 2017. (Appellant Exhibit 8)  
55. On December 5, 2016, as a result of Ms. Doe’s refusal to cooperate with the prosecution, the 
Commonwealth entered a Nolle Prosequi in the domestic assault and battery case. (Appellant 
Exhibit 11)  
56. On December 27, 2016, the Plainville Police Officer who was struck by Sgt. Gould signed an 
“Accord and Satisfaction” acknowledging that he received satisfaction for his alleg ed injuries 
and that he was seeking dismissal of the assault and battery charge against Sgt. Gould. 
(Appellant Exhibit 12)  
57. On January 2, 2017, Sgt. Gould was placed back on paid leave. (Appellant Exhibit 8)   15 58. On January 3, 2017, counsel for Sgt. Gould filed a request to continue the January 6, 2017 
hearing, noting that, although the criminal matters related to Ms. Doe had been dismissed, the 
case involving the Plainville Detective was scheduled for trial in April 2017. (Appellant 
Exhibit 6E)    
59. On January 5, 2 017, t he Board of Selectmen denied the request  for a continuance .  (Appellant 
Exhibit 8)  
60. On January 6, 2017, the Town’s designated hearing officer conducted the local hearing 
pursuant to G.L. c. 31, § 41.  Counsel for Sgt. Gould asked the hearing officer t o continue the 
hearing  until the criminal charges against Sgt. Gould were resolved.  The hearing officer, 
after hearing argument from both counsel, denied the request to continue the hearing, writing 
that the Town’s need to enforce the rules and regulation s of the Police Department 
outweigh ed the reasons to delay the matter any further. (Appellant Exhibit 8  and Appointing 
Authority Exhibit 3 ) 
61. Sgt. Gould did not testify at the local hearing on January 6th.   The case was presented 
through exhibits and counse l statements only.  Chief Reilly and Captain DiRenzo were 
present at the hearing to answer questions, but did not testify. (Appellant Exhibit 8 and 
Appointing Authority Exhibit 3)  
62. The hearing officer left the record open for submission of various documents , including an 
Appellant submission of a “statutory declaration” from Ms. Doe, which was never received. 
(Appellant Exhibit 8 and Appointing Authority Exhibit 3)  
63.  Via a document dated January 19, 2017, the local hearing officer submitted his findings and 
recommendations to the Board of Selectmen.  In his findings, the hearing officer stated in  16 part that:  “It is relevant that [Ms. Doe] has not recanted her report th at Gould beat her.” 
(Appointing Authority Exhibit 3)  
64. The local hearing officer further found in part that:  a)  “Sergeant Gould, in striking [the 
Plainville Detective], violated the law and the Police Department Rules and Regulations; 
specifically, Rule 4. 02 – Conducting Unbecoming and Officer; and Rule 11.12 – Criminal 
Conduct;” and b) “Sergeant Gould, in beating [Ms. Doe] violated the law and the Police 
Department Rules and Regulations, specifically Rule 4.02 – Conduct Unbecoming an 
Officer; and Rule 11.1 2 – Criminal Conduct.  The Domestic Violence by Police Officers 
Policy states, in pertinent part:  ‘It is the polic y of this department:  … not to retain 
employees that engage in domestic violence.’” (Appointing Authority Exhibit 3)  
65. The local hearing offic er concluded that Sgt. Gould ’s actions toward the Plainville Detective 
and Ms. Doe constituted just cause for his termination. (Appointing Authority Exhibit 3)  
66. The NAPD’s Rules and Regulations Manual addresses an officer’s off -duty conduct as 
follows:  
The department will generally limit its inquiry into an employee’s personal 
matters, off -duty conduct and outside employment, to situations impacting or 
reflecting upon the department or affecting the employee’s ability or fitness for 
duty….  The department ha s a legitimate interest in preserving the public’s trust 
and respect.  An employee’s off -duty personal relationships and conduct must not 
bring discredit to the officer or department, impact on the Department’s operation, 
affect the employee’s ability to p erform his or her job, or result in poor job 
performance….  
 
Both on and off -duty conduct may subject an officer to a charge of conduct 
unbecoming an officer .  Officers do not sever their relationship with the 
department at the end of their shift.  An offic er’s off -duty conduct, especially 
where there is some nexus or connection to the department or where the officer’s 
status as a police officer is or becomes known, may reflect unfavorably on both 
the officer and department….  
 
(Appointing Authority Exhibit 2 7) 
  17 67. Rule 4.02 – Conduct Unbecoming an Officer, mandates that officers “not commit any 
specific act or acts of immoral, improper, unlawful, disorderly or intemperate conduct, 
whether on or off duty, which reflect(s) discredit or reflect(s) unfavorably upon the officer, 
upon other officers or upon the police department.”  The Rule defines “conduct unbecoming” 
as including “that which tends to indicate that the officer is unable or unfit to continue as a 
member of the department, or tends to impair the operati on, morale, integrity, reputation or 
effectiveness of the department or its members.”  It also includes “off -duty conduct where 
there is a nexus or connection between the act or acts committed by the officer and that 
individual’s continued fitness or abili ty to effectively perform his or her required duties and 
responsibilities and/or the impact or adverse effect said conduct may have on the operation, 
morale, integrity, reputation or effectiveness of the department and ability of the officers not 
involved in said act to effectively perform their required duties and responsibilities.”  
(Appointing Authority Exhibit 27.)  
68. Rule 11.12 – Criminal Conduct, mandates that officers  shall  “not commit any motor vehicle 
or criminal act (felony or misdemeanor), or violat e the regulatory or criminal laws or statutes 
of the United States or of any state or local jurisdiction (by -law/ordinance), whether on or off 
duty.”  With regards to this rule, the Manual expressly notes that officers “may be guilty of 
violating this rule  regardless of the outcome of any criminal court case .  Conviction for the 
violation of any law is prima facie evidence of a violation of this rule.  However, even in the 
absence of a conviction (which requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt), an officer may 
still be disciplined under this rule for the conduct that was involved since a preponderance of 
the evidence is the quantity of proof required in such cases.”  (Appointing Authority Exhibit 
27.)  (Emphasis added)   18 69. NAPD Policy & Procedure No. 2.15 – Dome stic Violence by Police Officers, states that “it is 
essential that police professionals hold themselves to an exemplary standard in the area of 
domestic violence.  A pro -active approach must focus on victim safety.  The touchstone must 
be a policy of ‘zer o tolerance’ of acts of domestic violence by members of this department.”  
The policy of the NAPD is, inter alia , “not to retain employees that engage in domestic 
violence, elder abuse, sexual assault, or stalking… [and] to take disciplinary and criminal 
action against department members where appropriate.”  The Policy defines “domestic 
violence” as “an act or pattern of violence perpetrated by a police officer upon his or her 
intimate partner not done in defense of self or others, including but not limited  to the 
following:  Bodily injury or threat of imminent bodily injury; Sexual battery; Physical 
restraint; Property crime directed at the victim; Stalking; Violation of a court order of 
protection or similar injunction; and death threats or death.”  An “in timate partner” includes 
someone who “[h]as or had a dating relationship with the police officer… [and/or] [i]s 
cohabitating or has cohabitated romantically with the police officer.”  NAPD Policy & 
Procedure No. 2.15 clearly states that the NAPD adheres to  a zero -tolerance policy towards 
police officer domestic violence and that violation of the policy may result in disciplinary 
action “up to and including dismissal.”  (Appointing Authority Exhibit 28.)  
70. On January 20, 2017, the Board of Selectmen notified S gt. Gould that they would be meeting 
in Executive Session on January 26, 2017 to discuss the hearing officer’s report and 
disciplinary action that may be taken against him. (Appointing Authority Exhibit 53)  
71. On January 26, 2017, the Board of Selectmen met i n Executive Session. Sgt. Gould was 
given an opportunity to make a statement but declined. The Selectmen voted to adopt the  19 findings and recommendation of the hearing officer and terminate Sgt. Gould’s employment. 
(Appellant Exhibit 10)  
72. On February 3, 2017 , Sgt. Gould filed the instant appeal with the Commission. (Stipulated 
Fact)  
73. On April 5, 2017, at the criminal trial on the charge of assault and battery on the Plainville 
Police Officer, the trial judge accepted the accord and satisfaction, and the assaul t and battery 
charges against Sgt. Gould were dismissed.  After trial, Sgt. Gould was found not guilty of 
disturbing the peace. (Appellant Exhibit 17)  
74. Over the course of f ive (5) days between May 1, 2017 and July 30, 2017, I held a hearing and 
heard from various witnesses, including Sgt. Gould and Ms. Doe, who both denied that Sgt. 
Gould ever hit Ms. Doe.  
Applicable Civil Service Law  
G.L. c. 31, § 41 states in part:  
“Except for just cause and except in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph, a 
tenured employee shall not be discharged, removed, suspended for a period of more than 
five days, laid off, transferred from his position without his written consent if  he has 
served as a tenured employee since prior to October fourteen, nineteen hundred and sixty -
eight, lowered in rank or compensation without his written consent, nor his position be 
abolished. Before such action is taken, such employee shall be given a written notice by 
the appointing authority, which shall include the action contemplated, the specific reason 
or reasons for such action and a copy of sections forty -one through forty -five, and shall 
be given a full hearing concerning such reason or reasons  before the appointing authority 
or a hearing officer designated by the appointing authority. The appointing authority shall 
provide such employee a written notice of the time and place of such hearing at least 
three days prior to the holding thereof, exce pt that if the action contemplated is the 
separation of such employee from employment because of lack of work, lack of money, 
or abolition of position the appointing authority shall provide such employee with such 
notice at least seven days prior to the ho lding of the hearing and shall also include with 
such notice a copy of sections thirty -nine and forty. If such hearing is conducted by a 
hearing officer, his findings shall be reported forthwith to the appointing authority for 
action. Within seven days aft er the filing of the report of the hearing officer, or within 
two days after the completion of the hearing if the appointing authority presided, the 
appointing authority shall give to such employee a written notice of his decision, which  20 shall state fully and specifically the reasons therefor. Any employee suspended pursuant 
to this paragraph shall automatically be reinstated at the end of the first period for which 
he was suspended. In the case of a second or subsequent suspension of such employee for 
a period of more than five days, reinstatement shall be subject to the approval of the 
administrator, and the notice of contemplated action given to such employee shall so 
state. If such approval is withheld or denied, such employee may appeal to the 
commissio n as provided in paragraph (b) of section two.  
 
G.L. c. 31, § 4 2 states in part:  
 
Any person who alleges that an appointing authority has failed to follow the requirements 
of section forty -one in taking action which has affected his employment or compensat ion 
may file a complaint with the commission. Such complaint must be filed within ten days, 
exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, after said action has been taken, or 
after such person first knew or had reason to know of said action, and sha ll set forth 
specifically in what manner the appointing authority has failed to follow such 
requirements. If the commission finds that the appointing authority has failed to follow 
said requirements and that the rights of said person have been prejudiced t hereby, the 
commission shall order the appointing authority to restore said person to his employment 
immediately without loss of compensation or other rights.  
 
G.L. c. 31, § 43 provides:  
 
“If the commission by a preponderance of the evidence determines tha t there was just 
cause for an action taken against such person it shall affirm the action of the appointing 
authority, otherwise it shall reverse such action and the person concerned shall be 
returned to his position without loss of compensation or other r ights; provided, however, 
if the employee by a preponderance of evidence, establishes that said action was based 
 upon harmful error in the application of the appointing authority’s procedure, an 
error of law, or upon any factor or conduct on the part of t he employee not reasonably 
related to the fitness of the employee to perform in his position, said action shall not be 
sustained, and the person shall be returned to his position without loss of compensation or 
other rights. The commission may also modify any penalty imposed by the appointing 
authority.”  
 
     An action is “justified” if it is “done upon adequate reasons sufficiently supported by credible 
evidence, when weighed by an unprejudiced mind; guided by common sense and by correct rules 
of law;” Commissioners of Civil Service v. Municipal Ct. of Boston , 359 Mass. 211, 214 (1971); 
Cambridge v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 300, 304 (1997); Selectmen of Wakefield 
v. Judge of First Dist. Ct. , 262 Mass. 477, 482 (1928). The Commission determines  justification 
for discipline by inquiring, “whether the employee has been guilty of substantial misconduct  21 which adversely affects the public interest by impairing the efficiency of public service;” School 
Comm. v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 48 6, 488 (1997); Murray v. Second Dist. Ct. , 
389 Mass. 508, 514  (1983).  
The Appointing Authority’s burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence is satisfied 
“if it is made to appear more likely or probable in the sense that actual belief in its truth, derived 
from the evidence, exists in the mind or minds of the tribunal notwithstanding any doubts that 
may still linger there;” Tucker v. Pearlstein , 334 Mass. 33, 35-36 (1956).  
Under section 43, the Commission is required “to conduct a de novo hearing for  the purpose 
of finding the facts anew;” Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006) and 
cases cited.  However, “[t]he commission’s task.. .is not to be accomplished on a wholly blank 
slate. After making its de novo findings of fact, the co mmission does not act without regard to 
the previous decision of the [appointing authority], but rather decides whether ‘there was 
reasonable justification for the action taken by the appointing authority in the circumstances 
found by the commission to hav e existed when the appointing authority made its decision’,”  
which may include an adverse inference against a complainant who fails to testify at the hearing 
before the appointing authority; Id., quoting internally from Watertown v. Arria , 16 
Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983) and cases cited.   
Sgt. Gould ’s Section 42 ( Procedural Claims ) Appeal  
     Prior to terminating a tenured civil service employee, G.L. c. 31, § 41 requires that the 
employee be given:  1) a written notice by the appointing authority; and 2) a full hearing before 
the appointing authority or a hearing officer designated by the  appointing authority.  The written 
notice by the appointing authority must include the action contemplated, the specific reason or 
reasons for such action and a copy of sections forty -one through forty -five.  22     If the Commission finds that the Appointing  Authority failed to follow the above -referenced 
Section 41 procedural requirements and that the rights of said person have been prejudiced 
thereby, the Commission “shall order the Appointing Authority to restore said person to his 
employment immediately w ithout loss of compensation or other rights.”  G.L. c. 31, § 42.  
     A review of the record shows that the Town complied with all of the procedural requirements 
of the civil service law .  After the NAPD concluded its internal investigation into Sgt. Gould ’s 
actions on the night of July 29 -30, 2016, the Town provided him with written notice that it was 
considering disciplinary action up to and including termination.  The letter included a lengthy list 
of the specific reasons for the contemplated action .  The last paragraph of the letter clearly state d 
that a pre-disciplinary hearing pursuant to G.L. c. 31, §41 would be held before a designated 
hearing officer.  It is undisputed that a hearing before the hearing officer took place on January 6, 
2017, and that  Sgt. Gould  and his attorney were present for the entire hearing.  This was 
significantly more than the three days’ prior notice required by the statute.  The evidence also 
establishes that the hearing lasted from 10:00 a.m. until 1:45 p.m. and it is clear  from the hearing 
officer’s written report that the hearing addressed all of the reasons listed in the October 2, 2016 
pre-termination notice . 
       As required by the statute, the hearing officer issued a written report of his findings to the 
Board  of Selectmen  on January 19, 2017 and the Board voted to terminate Sgt. Gould  on January 
26, 2017.   Sgt. Gould  received written notice of the Board’s decision on January 27, 2017, which 
was within the statutory seven day requirement .  The written notice fr om the Board notifying 
Sgt. Gould  of his termination clearly stated that the decision to terminate was based on “the 
reasons set forth in the Hearing Officer’s report,” a copy of which had been provided to Sgt. 
Gould  in advance of the January 26th meeting and then again with the termination notice.    23      As part of the proceedings before the Commission, there was considerable time spent on 
whether Sgt. Gould was entitled to a second hearing before the Board of Selectmen (the 
Appointing Authority) after the  designated hearing officer submitted his findings and 
recommendations to the Board, based on comments made by individual members of the Board 
that Sgt. Gould would be given a “second bite of the apple” after the hearing officer’s report was 
submitted.  
     First, there is nothing in the civil service law that requires a second  hearing before the 
Appointing Authority after receiving the findings and recommendations of a designated hearing 
officer.   
      Second, Sgt. Gould, throughout these proceedings, in cluding those conducted at the local 
level, was represented by counsel well versed in the civil service law, including the process of 
designating a hearing officer.  
     Third, I reviewed the entirety of the transcripts and audio / video recordings of eac h Board of 
Selectmen meeting related to Sgt. Gould’s appeal.  What emerged was a picture of one member 
of the five -member Board unsuccessfully attempting  to create disorder and prevent any ruling or 
decision by the Board that could potentially result in th e termination of Sgt. Gould.   The Board’s 
Chairman , however,  ably navigated the Board ’s majority  through the nuances of the Town’s 
requirements under the civil service law -- and complied with all of the se statu tory requirements.  
     For these reasons, Sgt. Gould’s procedural appeal under Section 42 is denied .  
Just Cause Appeal  
     The Commission is once again faced with a case involving allegations of domestic abuse, the 
seriousness of which cannot be understated.  As the Commission recently stated in  Torres v. City 
of Chicopee,  30 MCSR 467 (2017), citing  Lavery v. North Attleborough , 30 MCSR 373 (2017):    24 “The Commonwealth’s policies against domestic violence are evident across all three branches 
of go vernment.  The legislature has repeatedly enacted legislation to respond to domestic 
violence.  Executive Order No. 563, “Re -Launching the Governor’s Council to Address Sexual 
Assault and Domestic Violence”, dated April 27, 2015, affirms and furthers the s tate’s long -
standing commitment to addressing domestic violence.  It states, in pertinent part,  
 
… Whereas, …  the Governor’s Office also acknowledges that sexual assault and domestic 
violence often go unreported …;  
Whereas, acknowledging the progress mad e by previous administrations, important work 
remains to be done to improve safety in our homes and throughout the Commonwealth; …  
 
Section 4. … the Council shall be charged with assessing the implementation of those parts of 
Chapter 260 of the Acts of 201 4 that establish new programs and introduce training and 
education targeted at reducing sexual assault and domestic violence in the Commonwealth …  
 
…4. Determine and report on the progress made by the Massachusetts District Attorneys’ 
Association in commen cing a course of training on the issues of domestic violence and sexual 
assault violence for all district attorneys and assistant district attorneys …;  
 
5. determine and report on the progress made by the trial court department in implementing a 
training p rogram on domestic violence and sexual violence for trial court employees ….  
  (Id.) 
 
The Executive Office of Public Safety & Security (EOPSS) issued the revised “Domestic 
Violence Law Enforcement Guidelines” in 2017 pursuant to Chapter 260 of the Acts of  2014, An 
Act Relative to Domestic Violence9.  http://www.mass.gov/eopss/docs/eops/2017 -dv-law-
enforcement -guidelines -final-07-06-2017.pdf    These l engthy and detailed Guidelines provide, in 
pertinent part,  
 
… anyone can be a victim; anyone can be an offender regardless of gender and/or sexual 
orientation. Always consider who is the dominant aggressor and make that determination based 
on the totality of the facts and circumstance, not on the victim/offender’s gender, size etc. …  
Many victims of domestic violence never file a report with law enforcement, get a 
restraining order/injunction, or connect with a domestic violence program.  …  
Furthermore, ma ny victims may regret calling 911 once they are thrust into the criminal 
justice system, which can bring increased financial burdens due to lost income, defense 
attorney fees, embarrassment for having to publicly testify to the abuse, and pressure to 
recan t. … 
 
Be aware that trauma may influence a victim’s interactions with law enforcement officers 
responding to domestic violence calls.  Do not assume a victim is uncooperative …. 
 (Id. at pp. 16 -17)(emphasis added)  
… 
                                                 
9 Pursuant to Chapter 260 of the Acts of 2014, all municipal police departments within Massachusetts are required to 
adopt the EOPSS DV Guidelines or establish and implement s pecific operational guidelines consistent with the 
EOPSS DV Guidelines.   25  On its website, the Massachusetts Distr ict Attorneys Association notes, in pertinent part,  
 
Prosecutors who handle domestic violence cases know that very few go to trial.  There are 
many obstacles that confront prosecutors trying domestic violence cases; including, trial 
delays, Fifth Amendment  claims by the victim, and accord and satisfactions on the day of 
trial. … 
http://www.mass.gov/mdaa/trainings -and-conferences/obstacles -in-trying -domestic -violence -
cases.html  (emphasis added) ” 
 
     Here, the Town, adopting the findings and recommendations of their designated hearing 
officer, concluded that Sgt. Gould, in addition to “striking” the Plainville Detective, “beat” his 
live-in girl friend, Ms. Doe, who is a Plainville Police Officer.  The parties appear to agree that, if 
the charges related to Ms. Doe are true, the decision to terminate Sgt. Gould wo uld be justified.  
The central factual dispute in this case, however, is whether  the Town has proven , by a 
preponderance of the evidence , that Sgt. Gould  actually  hit Ms. Doe, which both he and Ms. Doe 
denied during their sworn testimony during the Commission.  
          As previously referenced, Ms. Doe, as part of her sworn testimony before the Commission, 
adamantly denied that Sgt. Gould hit her on July 30th. Ms. Doe went a step further in her 
testimony before the Commission, either denying  or offering no plausible explanation10 for the 
contemporaneous statements she made to multiple individuals stating that Sgt. Gould hit her on 
July30th.   Standing alone, Ms. Doe’s testimony that she never made or couldn’t recall making 
such statements was not credible.  Further, her testimony was  contradicted by a series of text 
messages en tered into evidence showing that such statements were made.  Finally, and most 
importantly, Ms. Doe’s testimony regarding whether she made these statements was contradicted 
by a series of witnesses who offered credible, detailed testimony before the Commis sion 
regarding the conversations they had with Ms. Doe on or shortly after July 30th.  I listened 
                                                 
10Ms. Doe did acknowledge, in part, that she may have told her sister that she thought, at the time, that Sgt. Gould 
broke her nose:  
“Commissioner:  Did you tell her [your sister] that you thought Dave broke your nose?  
      Ms. Doe:  I might have said something like that …” Transcript, Volume V, p. 187 .  26 carefully to the testimony of these witnesses, reviewed their testimony again via the written 
transcript, and , when appropriate, compared their testimony agai nst relevant exhibits.  Based on 
this review, I have, as noted in the findings, credited the testimony of each of these witnesses in 
regard to statements that Ms. Doe made to them around this time period.  
      In summary, o n July 30, 2016 and the days im mediately thereafter, Ms. Doe sent multiple 
text messages to numerous people stating that Sgt. Gould hit her and she believed he had broken 
her nose as a result.  She made similar statements to people in face -to-face meetings and phone 
conversations during  this time.  Most significantly, she reached out to the Wrentham Deputy 
Police Chief to report that Sgt. Gould hit her.  Ms. Doe’s statements to the Wrentham Deputy 
Police Chief were fairly consistent with a subsequent conversation she had with her sister.  These 
two (2) conversations were the most in -depth statements she made to the group of individuals in 
whom she confided.  In both cases, she described being hit repeatedly and severely by Sgt. 
Gould.  Ms. Doe’s statements to the Wrentham Deputy Police Chi ef and her sister are also 
consistent with her statements and texts to her friend, the Plainville Detective,  the Plainville 
Police Officer  and others that Sgt. Gould had hit her and that she believed her nose to be broken 
as a result.  Having concluded tha t Ms. Doe did indeed make these statements, the issue before 
me, as it relates  to the incident with Ms. Doe, is whether the Town has proven, by a 
preponderance of the evidence, that Sgt. Gould actually engaged in the behavior alleged by Ms. 
Doe in her stat ements (i.e. – did Sgt. Gould hit Ms. Doe?)  The evidence supporting the Town’s 
argument that Sgt. Gould did hit Ms. Doe includes the following:  
 The relative consistency of Ms. Doe’s contemporaneous statements and text messages 
regarding the incident.  As noted above, Ms. Doe communicated with multiple people ,  27 including her sister and longtime, trusted friend, that Sgt. Gould hit her and that she 
attributed the pain in her nose to him hitting her.      
 As stated in the state’s Guidelines on Domestic Violence, referenced above, it is not 
uncommon for victims of domestic abuse  to recant their statements for various reasons, 
including financial reasons.  Sgt. Gould provides financial support to Ms. Doe and assists her 
with her childcare responsibilities. Ms. Doe’s dependence on Sgt. Gould arguably places 
even greater pressure on her to retract her earlier statements.   
 Even Ms. Doe, whose testimony before the Commission appeared to be geared toward 
minimizing the level, if a ny, of physical violence  committed by Sgt. Gould, acknowledged 
that Sgt. Gould “grabbed” her face and “held it” while he screamed at her.  
 Photographs taken by Ms. Doe show various parts of the home in disarray immediately after 
the fight had ended.  Sgt. G ould’s testimony that the damage depicted in these photographs 
was caused by his forceful slamming of the door upon exiting the home  was not credible.   
Even Ms. Doe could not corroborate this, choosing instead to claim she could not recall how 
her home was  damaged other than to allude to the fight.   
 Ms. Doe and Sgt. Gould both made a point of noting that this was the worst fight they had 
had to date.  Ms. Doe also stated that she had never seen Sgt. Gould as angry as he was on 
that night.  Also, it was the  first time in their relationship where Ms. Doe had demanded that 
Sgt. Gould move out of the home and he complied.   
 On previous occasions when they fought, Ms. Doe had never accused Sgt. Gould of 
physically assaulting her.   
 The testimony of Ms. Doe and Sgt. Gould appeared, in large part to be rehearsed, or 
coordinated, right down to details regarding where, how (and for what reason) Sgt. Gould  28 placed his fingers on Ms. Doe’s face on June 30th; (There was no mention of this occurrence 
at the pre -disciplin ary hearing before the hearing officer on January 6, 2017 or in the 
statutory declarations they both submitted to the Board on January 26, 2017. )   
 Sgt. Gould, at the time, never refuted Ms. Doe’s allegations in writing despite his claim that 
they were ent irely made up.  There are three examples in the record of occasions when Ms. 
Doe sent Sgt. Gould a text message accusing him of physically assaulti ng her on the night in 
question including one in which Ms. Doe explicitly stated to Sgt. Gould:  “ … You beat  on 
me last night.  I seriously have a broken nose …”     
Finally, I must consider that the Town was entitled to draw an adverse inference due to  
Sgt. Gould’s refusal to testify at the local hearing.   “The Commission is permitted, but not 
required, to dra w an adverse inference against an appellant who fails to testify at the hearing 
before the appointing authority. Town of Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm'n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 
(2006).”  Clark v. Boston Housing Authority , 24 MCSR 193 (2011), Clark v. Boston Ho using 
Authority , Suffolk Superior Court, C.A. No. SUCV2011 -2554E, aff’d (Feb. 13, 2015).  In a civil 
case, the Massachusetts courts have held that even a party asserting his or her rights against self -
incrimination under the U.S. or Massachusetts Constitut ions “may be the subject of a negative 
inference by a fact finder where the opposing party … has established a case adverse to the 
person invoking the privilege. Quintal v. Commissioner of the Dep’t of Employment & Training , 
418 Mass. 855, 861 (1994), quot ing Custody of Two Minors , 396 Mass. 610, 616 (1986).”  
Town of Falmouth , at 826 -27 (citations omitted).  While the adverse inference may not be 
required, in Town of Falmouth , the Supreme Judicial Court found that the Commission erred 
when it failed to fac tor into its decision to reduce the Appellant’s suspension from 180 days to 60 
days that the Appellant failed to testify at the Town’s hearing, invoking the privilege against self - 29 incrimination.  Id.   Finally, an adverse inference “cannot alone  meet the plaintiff’s burden.  See 
McGinnis v. Aetna Life & Casualty Co ., [398 Mass. 37, 39 (1986)].”  Frizado v. Frizado , 420 
Mass. 592, 596 (1995)(emphasis added).   
     I have carefully reviewed the parties’ arguments regarding whether such an inferenc e could 
be drawn from the Town, including whether Town of Falmouth  is distinguishable from the 
instant appeal.  I have:  a) concluded that the Town was justified in drawing an adverse inference 
based on Sgt. Gould’s failure to testify at the local hearing;  and b) considered this adverse 
inference by the Town as part of the de novo hearing before the Commission.  The Town (both 
the Appointing Authority and their designated hearing officer) carefully considered Sgt. Gould’s 
request to continue the hearing and  granted him a continuance until January 2017, approximately 
three (3) months from the initial hearing date set by the Town, and approximately five (5) 
months from the date of the alleged misconduct in July 2016.  Faced with another request, in 
January 201 7, to indefinitely postpone the local hearing until the criminal proceedings were 
concluded, the Town considered the need to enforce the Police Department’s rules and 
regulations, the uncertainty of when the criminal proceedings would be concluded, and the  
ongoing financial burden to pay overtime for individuals covering Sgt. Gould’s shifts.  
Ultimately, the Town decided to move forward with the local hearing, at which time the Town 
presented the hearing officer with the results of an internal investigation  in which multiple 
individuals  stated that Ms. Doe, shortly after July30th,  had unequivocally told them that Sgt. 
Gould had hit her that night.  Under these circumstances, the hearing officer was justified in 
drawing an adverse inference from Sgt. Gould’s  failure to testify, even though the criminal 
charges related to the alleged striking of the Plainville Detective were still pending.   30      I do not, however, read Town of Falmouth  or any other cases cited, as requiring me to 
automatically disregard or giv e no weight to the testimony of an Appellant who, like Sgt. Gould, 
failed to testify at the local hearing and then chooses to testify before the Commission.  Rather, I 
heard Sgt. Gould’s testimony, assessed his credibility, and then, as part of my final re view here, 
considered the fact that the Town was entitled to draw an adverse inference from his failure to 
offer this testimony at the local hearing.   
     I also considered the evidence that would support a conclusion that Sgt. Gould did not hit Ms. 
Doe,  including the following:  
 Ms. Doe testified before the Commission that she was not “hit” or “beaten” by Sgt. Gould.  
 Sgt. Gould testified before the Commission that he never “hit” or “beat” Ms. Doe.  
 The veracity of Ms. Doe’s prior statements  that she was in deed hit by Sgt. Gould are 
undercut by her untruthful denials during her sworn testimony before the Commission that 
she ever made most of these statements.  
  There was no sign of physical injury  to Ms. Doe.   The Wrentham Deputy Police Chief saw 
no signs of  injury on Ms. Doe hours after the incident.  A Plainville Police Lieutenant who 
saw Ms. Doe on August 4th saw no signs of injury.  Her ex -husband who saw Ms. Doe one 
day after the incident s aw no signs of injury.  While Ms. Doe’s friend said she saw what 
appears to be a “crooked nose”, that is not consistent with the credible testimony of others 
who saw no such thing shortly after the incident.  Also, the contempo raneous pictures taken 
by Ms. Doe do not show signs of physical injury.  
 Ms. Doe’s statements r egarding Sgt. Gould hitting her  were made  after she was admittedly 
(and justifiably) angry that Sgt. Gould had texted three (3) of her colleagues making what  31 Sgt. Gould admits were false allegations he caught Ms. Doe “fucking” the Plainville Police 
Detecti ve. 
 One (1) day after the incident, Ms. Doe texted Sgt. Gould and asked him to join her on a 
family vacation.  
     After weighing all of the evidence, I have concluded that Sgt. Gould and Ms. Doe, during 
their testimony before the Commission, understated the level of physical violence that occurred 
in Ms. Doe’s home during the overnight hours of July 29 -30, 2016.  Specifically, I have 
concluded that it is more likely than not that Sgt. Gould did indeed hit Ms. Doe so badly that 
night that she believed that  her nose was broken.  During contemporaneous statements to others, 
including her sister and trusted friend, she provided an honest recollection of what occurred.  Not 
long afterward, Ms. Doe , exhibiting behavior consistent with the victims of domestic vio lence,  
sought to recant her statements and encourage those who she spoke with not to take any action.  
Both personally and through counsel, she then sought to assist Sgt. Gould by failing to cooperate 
in the internal investigation, refusing to testify in t he criminal cases against him and then 
submitting a written statement containing false statements to the Town’s Board of Selectmen.  
Finally, Ms. Doe,  in what appeared, in  important parts , to be contrived, choreographed testimony  
before the Commission that was not persuasive, sought to recant, in part, her prior statements.   
     As referenced above, even Ms. Doe acknowledges, for the first time, that Sgt. Gould, in a fit 
of anger, grabbed and held her face while screaming at her that night. The photog raphs taken that 
night are consistent with an even more violent encounter, with furniture overturned and a shelf 
that had been screwed into the living room wall on the ground.  Whi le only one piece of 
evidence that I considered, it appeared that this was o ne of the few events that night for which 
Sgt. Gould and Ms. Doe had not coordinated their testimony.  In that context, it was noteworthy  32 to me that Sgt. Gould’s explanation for the shelf coming off the wall was that he slammed the 
kitchen door with such f orce upon exiting that the shelf easily fell to the ground.  Ms. Doe was 
certain that Sgt. Gould, although angry, left the residence that night without incident (i.e. – no 
such slamming of the door causing a shelf to fall).  For her part, Ms. Doe could not  offer any 
reasonable explanation as to why the shelf came off the wall that night.  Accepting the testimony  
of Ms. Doe that  she did not observe Sgt. Gould slam the door upon his exit, the shelf , therefore,  
came off the wall for another reason.  Commonsense argues that it likely came off the wall 
because  of a violent struggle between Sgt. Gould and Ms. Doe.11 
     The Appellant’s emphasis, during these proceedings, regarding Ms. Doe’s subsequent 
medical diagnosis that would explain experiencing pain in her nose was an unfortunate, and 
unpersuasive, attempt at diversion.  Regardless of whether Ms. Doe had the subsequent medical 
diagnosis, the point has always been tha t Ms. Doe, at the time, believed that Sgt. Gould struck 
her with such force, that she thought he  broke her nose – at the time.  The subsequent medical 
diagnosis does nothing to change that she attributed her pain, at the time, to Sgt. Gould hitting 
her tha t night.  
    I also gave significant weight to the fact that Sgt. Gould, when receiving a text message from 
Ms. Doe alleging that he broke her nose, failed to reply.  The record shows repeated text 
messages between Sgt. Gould and Ms. Doe after the incident  and Sgt. Gould was not hesitant to 
respond to the various, emotionally charged text messages that he was receiving from Ms. Doe.  
That one, however, stood out, for Sgt. Gould’s failure to reply and his testimony regarding why 
he failed to respond was unpe rsuasive.  Further, while listening to Sgt. Gould’s testimony, and 
reviewing it later, it appeared to me that he attempted to offer contrived testimony stating that he 
                                                 
11 Even, for the sake of argument, if the she lf did  fall to the ground because of the slamming of the door, it would 
not change my final conclusion that Sgt. Gould  did indeed  hit Ms. Doe.   33 did challenge this text message days later while Ms. Doe was giving him a haircut.  To m e, it 
appeared that Sgt. Gould suspected that his failure to respond to that text message could be 
painting him in a bad light and that he needed to “fill in the blanks” with the alleged “haircut 
conversation.”  It didn’t ring true to me – at all – and was  yet another reason for me to question 
whether Sgt. Gould was being truthful about whether he hit Ms. Doe in her home on the night in 
question.  In summary, even with the benefit of reviewing the testimony of Sgt. Gould and Ms. 
Doe, who did not testify at the local hearing, I reach the same conclusion that the local hearing 
officer did:  it is more likely than not that Sgt. Gould did indeed hit Ms. Doe.  
     That leaves the issue of Sgt. Gould, earlier in the night, punching the Plainville Detective, 
which he does not deny.  After reviewing all of the evidence, I have concluded that Sgt. Gould   
confronted  the Plainville Detective on a public street in th e middle of the night and punched him 
on the left side of his face.  Sgt. Gould  admits to assault ing the Plainville Detective , but he tries 
to minimize the impact of his actions by emphas izing that it was a single punch.  He claims that 
he acted instinctiv ely because the Plainville Detective  had adopted a fighting stance and had his 
hands in fists.  I don’t believe that is what transpired. The Plainville Detective, who was 
travelling the roads of Plainville that night, was, by his own accounts, highly intox icated and 
caught by complete surprise when Sgt. Gould ran toward him.  Further, when the Plainville 
Detective was intervi ewed by Captain DiRenzo  on August 9, 2016, which was shortly after the 
night in question, he never stated that he had adopt ed any type  of stance prior to Sgt. Gould  
punching him.  It was not until months later, on April 5, 2017, that the Plainville Detective  
indicated during the criminal trial on the domestic disturbance charge against Sgt. Gould  that he 
had adopt ed a “defensive stance” prior to the punch .  To me, this was simply an attempt by t he 
Plainville Detective, who has made a formal apology to Sgt. Gould  for kissing his girlfriend and  34 stated that he understood why Sgt. Gould  punched him , to paint a picture more favorable to Sgt. 
Gould. In short, any suggestion that Sgt. Goul d was somehow  acting in self defense when he 
struck the Plainville Detective that night is absurd.  
     Collectively, the actions of Sgt. Gould , described above, provided the Town with just cause to 
discipline him for conduct unbecoming a police officer and violation s of the rules and 
regulations of the Town’s Police Department cited in the findings, including those related to 
domestic violence.  
Just Cause for Termination  
     Having determined that Sgt. Gould did engage in the alleged misconduct, I must determine  
whether the level of discipline (termination) was warranted.  
     As stated by the SJC in Falmouth v. Civ. Serv. Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814 (2006):  
     “After making its de novo findings of fact, the com mission must pass judgment  
 on the penalty imposed by the appointing authority, a role to which the statute  
 speaks directly.  G.L. c. [31], s. § 43 (‘The commission may also modify any  
 penalty imposed by the appointing authority.’)  Here the commission does  
 not act without regard to the previous decision of the [appointing authority],  
but rather decides whether ‘there was reasonable justification for the action taken by  
the appointing authority in the circumstances found by the commission to have  
existed when the appointing authority made its decision.” Id. citing  Watertown v.  
Arria ,16 Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983).  
 
 “Such authority to review and amend the penalties of the many disparate  
 appointing authorities subject to its jurisdiction inherently  promotes the  
 principle of uniformity and the ‘equitable treatment of similarly situated  
 individuals.’ citing Police Comm’r of Boston v. Civ. Serv. Comm’n , 39 
 Mass.App.Ct. 594, 600 (1996).  However, in promoting these principles,  
 the commission cann ot detach itself from the underlying purpose of the  
 civil service system — ‘to guard against political considerations, favoritism  
 and bias in governmental employment decisions.” Id. (citations omitted).  
 
 -- 
 
 “Unless the commission’s findings of fact differ significantly from those reported  
 by the town or interpret the relevant law in a substantially different way, the  
 absence of political considerations, favoritism or bias would warrant essentially   35  the same penalty.  The commission is not free to  modify the penalty imposed by  
 the town on the basis of essentially similar fact finding without an adequate  
 explanation.” Id. at 572. (citations omitted).  
 
     First, m y findings do not differ significantly from those reported by the Town.  Similar to the 
Town, I have found that Sgt. Gould punched the Plainville Detective in the face and that he hit 
Ms. Doe in a way that caused her to believe that her nose was broken.  These a ctions constitute 
“substantial misconduct which adversely af fects the pub lic interest by impairing the efficiency of 
public service.”  School Comm. v. Civil Serv . Comm’n , 43 Mass. App. Ct. at 488.   
     Second, I reviewed Sgt. Gould’s allegations that the Town’s actions against him were driven, 
in part, by alleged  animus against him related to grievances that he filed shortly before the 
incident in question and the ensuing internal affairs investigation.  Based on a full review of the 
record, including the relatively inconsequential nature of the grievances and rel ated issue s, as 
well as the credible testimony of Captain DiRenzo, I have concluded that:  a) there was no 
personal animus against Sgt. Gould; and b) the internal affairs investigation was undertaken and 
conducted with the sole intent of finding the facts and responding accordingly.  As previously 
touched upon, I reviewed all of the exhibits submitted in this matter, including the audio / video 
taped interviews conducted in whole or in part by Captain DiRenzo.  Each of those interviews 
was done in a thoroug h, professional manner, with an emphasis on pulling together all of the 
relevant facts.  In short, the interna l affairs investigation, and the thorough  manner  in which it 
was completed, was warranted by the seriousness of the charges.  
     Third, I consid ered that, with the exception of “training letters”, which are not considered 
formal discipline, Sgt. Gould has no prior disciplinary history.  While the Commission has long 
considered progressive discipline to be consistent with the basic merit principles  of the civil 
service law, the seriousness of the conduct here justifies termination, even absent any prior  36 formal discipline.  Given that NAPD  officers respond to numerous domestic abuse calls , it would 
be antithetical to his duties and responsibilities a s a Police Sergeant for Sgt. Gould  to respond to 
such calls, having been the perpetrator of such abuse himself.   See Patrick O’Brien v. City of 
Lowell , 28 MCSR 409, 413 (2015), concurring opinion of Commissioners Bowman and Stein 
(“The Commission, through a series of decisions, has firmly established that engaging in 
domestic violence is a valid reason for bypassing candidates – and disciplining incumbent civil 
service employees .)  In addition, Sgt. Gould ’s actions were widely reported in the local press 
after his arrest.  In every article, he is identified as an officer of the NAPD  and his victims are 
identified as local police officers . There is no doubt that the press reports of Sgt. Gould ’s actions 
have brought disrepute to the Town and the NAPD , further  impairing Sgt. Gould ’s efficacy as a 
public safety officer . 
     “The Commission is mindful that ‘police officers voluntarily undertake to adhere to a higher 
standard of conduct than that imposed on ordinary citizens.’”  DeTerra v. New Bedford Police 
Dep’t, 29 MCSR 502 , 508 (2016), quoting Attorney  Gen. v. McHatton , 428 Mass. 790, 793 
(1999).  
Police officers must comport themselves in accordance with the laws that they are 
sworn to enforce and behave in a manner that brings honor and respect for rather 
than public distrust of law enforcement personnel.  They are required to do more 
than refrain from indictable conduct.  Police officers are not drafted into public 
service; rather, they compete for their positions.  In accepting employment by the 
public, they  implicitly agree that they will not engage in conduct which calls into 
question their ability and fitness to perform their official responsibilities.  
 
Police Comm’r of Boston v. Civil Serv. Comm’n , 22 Mass. App. Ct. 364, 371 (1986).  
(Emphasis in original .)  Where the abuser is a police officer, it is particularly important for the  37 Commission to affirm a decision to terminate once there is a finding of domestic  abuse because it 
makes clear that no one is above the law.12 
      Finally, I considered Sgt. Gou ld’s argument that he was subjected to disparate treatment, 
pointing to a long -ago incident in which Captain DiRenzo was involved in a physical 
confrontation with a person who had been allegedly harassing Captain DiRenzo’s wife at work.  
Ultimately, I didn’ t find  those circumstances, for which Captain DiRenzo was not disciplined,  
comparable  to Sgt. Gould’s misconduct  for many reasons, including the fact that Captain 
DiRenzo was not found to have engaged in domestic violence, as is the case here. The only 
situation presented by the parties which I find to be comparable to the facts of the present case is 
that of Glenn Lavery.  Mr. Lavery was employed by the Town as a Firefighter until he was 
terminated in late 2015 for physically assaulting his former girlfri end.   As M r. Lavery’s 
termination occurred relatively close in time to the termination of Sgt. Gould , it is relevant for 
purposes of determining disparate treatment.  In addition, the misconduct was relatively similar, 
though Sgt. Gould ’s was arguably more egregious since he assaulted two individuals who were 
also police officers.  In addition to Mr. Lavery, Chief Reilly testified about two other officers of 
the NAPD who had committed acts of domestic abuse , both of whom resigned in lieu of 
termination.    
Conclusion  
     For all of the above reasons, the Town’s decision to terminate Sgt. Gould’s employment is 
affirmed and  Sgt. Gould’s appeal under Docket No. D1 -17-025 is denied .  
 
                                                 
12 Although it did not factor into my decision here, it is worth noting that, in addition to the rule violations put forth 
by the Town, Sgt. Gould engaged in serious untruthfulness when he texted multiple colleagues of Ms. Doe, who is a 
Plainville Police Officer, and stated that he found her “fucking” one of her colleagues. Sgt. Gould admits that this 
was a  lie that he told for the sole p urpose of harming Ms. Doe’s reputation.  It is unclear to me why the Town did 
not take any action related to this acknowledged untruthfulness.   38 Civil Service Commission  
/s/ Christopher Bowman  
Christopher C. Bowman  
Chairman  
 
By a vote of the Civil Service Commission (Bowman, Chairman; Camuso, Ittleman, Stein and 
Tivnan, Commissioners) on June 7, 2018.  
 
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration within ten days of the receipt of this Commission order or 
decision. Under the pertinent provisions of the Code of Mass. Regulations, 801 CMR 1.01(7)(l), the motion must 
identify a clerical or mechanical error in this order or decision or a significant factor the Agency or the Presiding 
Officer may have overlooked in deciding the case.  A motion for reconsideration does not  toll the statutorily 
prescribed thirty -day time limit for seeking judicial review of this Commission order or decision.  
 
Under the provisions of G.L c. 31, § 44, any party aggrieved by this Commissi on order or decision may initiate 
proceedings for judicial review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior court within thirty (30) days after receipt of 
this order or decision. Commencement of such proceeding shall not, unless specifically ordered by the c ourt, operate 
as a stay of this Commission order or decision.  After initiating proceedings for judicial review in Superior Court, 
the plaintiff, or his / her attorney, is required to serve a copy of the summons and complaint upon the Boston office 
of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, with a copy to the Civil Service Commission, in the time and in the 
manner prescribed by Mass. R. Civ. P. 4(d)  
 
Notice to:  
Leigh Panettiere, Esq. (for Appellant)  
Wendy Chu, Esq. (for Respondent)  
  
 