1 
 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
   
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
       One Ashburton Place:  Room 503  
       Boston, MA 02108  
       (617) 727 -2293  
WILLIAM GREEN , 
 Appellant    
 
v. D1-17-104 
 
CITY OF LAWRENCE , 
 Respondent  
 
 
Appearance for Appellant:  William Green, pro se  
              
Appearance for Respondent:  Robert D. Hillman, Esq.  
Deutsch Williams  
One Design Center Place, Suite 600  
Boston, MA  02210  
       
Commissioner:  Cynthia A. Ittleman  
  
 DECISION  
 
 On May 22, 2017, William Green ( the Appellant or Mr. Green) filed the instant a ppeal 
with the Civil Service Commission (the Commission) under G.L. c. 31, ss. 42 and 43, 
challenging the decision of the City of Lawrence ( the Respondent , the City  or Lawrence ) to 
terminat e his employment as a Patr ol Officer in the Lawrence Police Department ( the LPD or the 
Department).  The Commission held a prehearing conference in this regard at the Mercier 
Community Center in Lowell on July 10, 2017 and a full hearing was held at the same location 
in Lowell on August 14, 2017.1 Having not received a written request for a public hearing, the 
hearing was private.  The hearing was digitally recorded and copies of the recording were sent to 
                                                           
1 The Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure, 801 CMR ss. 1.00, et seq ., apply to adjudications 
before the Commission with G.L. c. 31 or any Commission rules taking precedence.  
 2 
 the parties.2  The witnesses, with the exception of the Appellant, were sequestered.  Both parties 
submitted post -hearing briefs.   For the reasons stated herein, the appeal is denied.     
FINDINGS OF FACT:   
 Thirty -six (36) Exhibits (Ex.) were entered into evidence at the hea ring.3  Based on the 
Exhibits and the testimony of the following witnesses:  
Called by the Appointing Authority : 
 
 Sergeant (Sgt.) Sandy Picard, LPD  
 Officer Wayne Taylor, LPD  
 Lieutenant (Lt.) Michael McCarty, LPD  
 Then -Chief James Fitzpatrick LPD   
 
Called by the Appellant:  
 
 William Green  (Appellant)  
and taking administrative notice of all matters filed in the case; stipulations4; pertinent statutes, 
case law, regulations, rules, and policies; and reasonable inferences from the credible evidence; a 
preponderance of the evidence establishes the following facts:  
1. The Appellant was hired by the LPD in 2005 as a Patrol Officer.  (Testimony of 
Appellant)  As a member of the LPD, the Appellant was subject to the Department’s 
Rules and Regulations.  (Exs. 28  (Rules effective March 2016) and Ex. 29 (Rules 
effective prior to March 2016))   
2. On March 20, 2017, the Respondent terminated the Appellant’s employment for: 1) 
arriving late and in improper uniform to a day -long detail on November 2, 2016, 
                                                           
2If there is a judicial appeal of this decision, the plaintiff in the judicial appeal would be obligated to supply the court 
with a transcript of this hearing to the extent that he/she wishes to challenge t he decision as unsupported by the 
substantial evidence, arbitrary and capricious, or an abuse of discretion.  In such cases, this CD should be used by 
the plaintiff in the judicial appeal to transcribe the recording into a written transcript.  
3The Exhibits  were entered into the record at the hearing as Joint Exhibits, with the understanding that the parties 
did not contest the authenticity of the documents but reserved their rights to argue the relevance of the Exhibits. 
After careful review of all of the e vidence in the record, I have found the Exhibits relevant and assigned them the 
weight they are d ue. 
4 At the prehearing conference in this case, the parties stipulated to certain facts.  (Administrative Notice)   3 
 expressed anger  when ordered to produce a memo explaining his tardiness arrival, and 
left the detail  twenty (20) minutes after he arrived after he was instructed to remain at the 
detail until a replacement could arrive; he was absent without leave on November 23, 26, 
27, 28 and 29 and December 2, 3 and 4, 2016; 3) intimidated a witness and was 
insubordinate to Lt. McCarthy, who was investigating allegations that the Appellant 
committed an assault and battery on another officer; and 4) was untruthful when he told 
the Polic e Chief  that he did not recall telling Lt. McCarthy that he (Lt. McCarthy) may 
become “collateral damage” regarding his investigation of the Appellant.  (Ex. 1)  
Charge 1: Abandoned Detail  
3. Police details are administered by the Administrative Division of th e LPD, which is led 
by Lt. Sean Burke.  Sgt. Sandy Picard assists Lt. Burke in this regard.  (Testimony of 
Picard)   Details are assigned to police officers through a system established by the 
collective  bargaining agreement (CB A) between the city and the union representing 
patrol officers.  (Testimony of Picard)  Since 2005, t he list of officers eligible for details 
was administ ered by Patrol Officer Wayne Taylor, who would contact officers, in the 
order of eligibility, to offer them available details.  (Testimony of Taylor)  
4. On November 1, 2016, LPD Chief Fitzpatrick issued a “Road Job Order” to all personnel 
via email messages and by posting it in LPD headquarters, establishing a new process for 
monitoring details  that would begi n on November 2, 2016 .  (Ex. 7; Testimony of Picard)  
The new process required Sgt. Pic ard to make sure that details were staff ed on time by 
officers who were properly uniformed.  ( Id.) 
5. The Appellant accepted an assignment to work a series of security deta ils requested by 
the Greater Lawrence Family Health Center (Health Center) at 150 Park Street in 4 
 Lawrence from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.  (Testimony of Picard)  
6. On November 2, 2016, Sgt. Picard began her duties by visiting the details that were to 
begin at 7 a.m.  At approximately 7:45 a.m., Sgt. Picard was at a detail at the intersection 
of Lawrence Street and Park Street, which was close to the Health Center.  Since Sgt. 
Picard was near the Health Center and the Appellant was expected to begin a detail there 
at 8 a.m., Sgt. Picard went to the Health Center to wait for the Appellant.  (Testimony of 
Picard)  
7. The Appellant’s November 2, 2016 detail was a “security” d etail because there had been 
two (2) recent shooting incidents in that area.  The Health Center had non -LPD security 
guards but they were unarmed.  (Testimony of Picard)  
8. When the Appellant had not arrived a few minutes before the detail was to begin at 8 
a.m., Sgt. Picard texted the Appellant and contacted him by LPD radio, creating a time -
stamped chronology of these matters.  (Ex. 5)  
9. The Appellant arrived at the Health Center approximately seventeen ( 17) minutes late.  
(Ex. 7)  When the Appellant arrived, Sgt. Picard noted that the Appellant arrived without 
his hat and without displaying his badge, which are part of the required uniform for an 
officer on detail, as required by LPD.   Sgt. Picard had to instruct the Appellant to get his 
hat from his car and to put his badge on his uniform.  Further, Sgt. Picard told the 
Appellant to write a standard “to/from” memorandum to her regarding the reason for his 
tardiness.  (Exs. 5, 6 and 7; T estimony of Picard)  
10. After the Appellant retrieved his hat and put on his badge, the Appellant told Sgt. Picard 
that he did not want to work the detail and that he’d speak to the details administrator to 
obtain a replacement for himself.  Sgt. Picard did no t object to what the Appellant  said 5 
 but she advised him that there could be no gap in coverage at the detail because the 
Health Center was having “trouble in the neighborhood”.  (Testimony of Picard; Ex. 5)  
11. On November 2, 2016, Officer Wayne Taylor was adm inistering the details.  He had 
assigned the Appellant to the Health Center detail.  After the Appellant spoke to Sgt. 
Picard, the Appellant contacted Officer Taylor and complained that he had been asked to 
write a “to/from memo”.  The Appellant complained  to Officer Taylor that he was being 
“watched”, he would not put up with “any of this shit”, and that he was leaving the detail.  
Officer Taylor told the Appellant that he (Officer Taylor) would find a replacement for 
the Health Center detail but he did no t authorize the Appellant to abandon his post.  The 
Appellant left the detail at or around 8:35 a.m. before a replacement was identified to 
report to the Health Center detail.  (Testimony of Taylor; Ex. 5)  
12. By memo dated November 2, 2016, the Appellant prov ided Sgt. Picard with his 
explana tion for his tardiness that day, citing several factors, including a broken boot lace 
and having to drop his wife off at work.  (Ex. 10)    
13. When staffing details, the LPD gives the highest priority to security details, whic h are 
filled first, prior to traffic control details.  If circumstances require an officer to leave a 
security detail, the LPD will fill it immediately, and, if no replacement is available, the 
department will have a police car from that day’s shift report  to that location.  (Testimony 
of Taylor)   
14. The Appellant was interviewed regarding the November 2, 2016 detail incident.  In the 
interview, the Appellant admitted that he was late to the detail and that Sgt. Picard had to 
tell the Appellant to find and pu t on his hat and badge. The Appellant further stated that 
after Sgt. Picard left, he contacted Officer Taylor and asked if he could find another 6 
 officer for the detail and told Officer Taylor that he was leaving.  The Appellant also 
admitted that he left the detail at or around 8:35 a.m. before his relief, Officer Angel 
Lopez, arrived.  (Ex. 5)  
15. LPD Rule 7.11.2 , Neglect of Duty , states,   
“Members shall not be absent from their assigned duty without leave; leave their 
post, sector, beat, or assignment without being properly detailed, relieved or 
making required notifications.”  (Ex. 28)  
 
16. LPD Rule 8.23.2, Reporting for Duty, states,  
“All members shall  report for duty promptly at the time and place required by 
their assignment or as otherwise directed by the Chief or Officer in charge. They 
shall be properly attired with uniforms cleaned, pressed and serviceable.  They 
shall report for duty having achie ved an acceptable level of personal hygiene.  
They shall be properly equipped and ready to immediately assume their duties.”  
(Exs. 28)   
 
17. The Appellant was the only LPD officer to abandon a detail without being excused in the 
twelve (12) years that Office r Taylor administered details.  (Testimony of Taylor)  The 
Appellant was not the only LPD officer cited for failure to be on time for his detail on 
November 2, 2016  as Sgt. Picard also asked Officer L to prepare a “to/from” memo for 
being late to his detai l at another  location on November 2, 2016. (Ex. 7)5 
18. On November 8, 2016, then -Chief Fitzpatrick directed Lt.  Michael McCarthy to 
investigate the Appellant’s conduct on November 2, 2016 in connection with the detail to 
which he was assigned.  Lt. McCarthy interviewed the Appellant, Officer Taylor and Sgt. 
Picard and obtained memoranda from Lt. Burke to Chief Fitzpatrick, from Sgt. Picard to 
Lt. Burke, and from the Appellant to Sgt. Picard.  Lt. McCarthy prepared an investigation 
report in which he concluded  that the Appellant was tardy for the Nov. 2, 2016 detail  and 
                                                           
5 Ex. 7 includes records showing the offic ers whose details were checked on November 1, 2 and 3 in 2016, 
indicating that the Department was not only checking the Appellant’s detail.   Exhibit 7 also includes the to/from 
memo that Officer L was ordered by Sgt. Picard to write.   7 
 that he abandoned the detail before he could be replaced  in violation of LPD Rules 7.11.2 
(neglect of duty) and 8.23.2 (reporting for duty) .  (Exs.  5, 6 and 8)  
Charge 2 – Absence from Duty Without Leave  
19. The LPD maintains a record of officers assigned t o each shift which indicates their 
attendance.  The record show s the assignments by platoon (indicating the shift) to which 
officers are assigned.  Each platoon is divided into three (3) groups.  Two (2) groups are 
assigned to work each day and one (1) group is off.  (Testimony of Fitzpatrick; Ex. 11 
(the group not sch eduled to work is marked with a shaded block))  
20. Front desk duty, as indicated on the LPD schedule, is a regular duty assignment.  
(Testimony of Fitzpatrick; Ex. 11)  For m ost of the days that the Appellant was scheduled 
to work from November 1 – December 8,  2016 , he was assigned to the front desk.  In the 
days and/or shifts that the Appellant was not scheduled to work, other officers were 
assigned to the front desk.  (Ex. 11)  
21. The Appellant was scheduled for duty on November 23, 26, 27, 28 and 29, 2016  but he  
failed to report to duty and was marked “AWOL” on the LPD attendance records.  (Ex. 
11 (see record for November 2016))    
22. On Sunday, November 27, 2016, the Appellant contacted the LPD for the first time since 
his “AWOL ” period began.  The Appellant spoke to Detective (Det.) Sgt. Aguilar, the 
Platoon Officer in charge, at approximately 2:45 p.m.  The Appellant asserted that he was 
sick and would not report for duty. The Appellant had exhausted his sick leave, as well as 
all other available leave time so Sgt. Aguilar called him back to advise him that he was 
required to report for duty or he would be marked AWOL.  (Ex. 14)  
23. The Appellant told Sgt. Aguilar that “he needed to make some phone calls” and would 8 
 call Sgt. Aguilar back.  (Ex. 14)  At or about 3:10 p.m., the Appellant called Sgt. Aguilar 
and told him that he would not be working that night.  Sgt. Aguilar told the Appellant 
about “potential disciplinary consequences of his refusal to report for duty”  to which the 
Appe llant responded that he “recognized” that but that he disagreed with the L PD’s  
position   and that he would “take the night off” and “let the department do whatever it 
[the department ] wants to do.”  ( Id.) 
24. On Monday, November 28, 2 016, following three (3) shifts of unexcused absences, the 
Appellant appeared at the office of Lt. Daniel Fleming, the Officer in Charge, at 
approximately 3:15 p.m.  (Ex. 15) The Appellant told Lt. Fleming that he would not 
report for duty that day as scheduled and that he would not be coming to work in the 
“foreseeable future”.  ( Id.)  Lt. Fleming asked the Appellant to clarify that he was 
refusing to work.  The Appellant said “until things get resolved, I won’t be coming to 
work” but he did not explain what things had to be resolved.  ( Id.) 
25. The Appellant failed to report for duty as s cheduled on December 2, 3  and 4, 2016 and 
was marked AWOL for each of those dates.  (Ex s. 11 - 15)  At the time that the Appellant 
was marked AWOL, he had no leave time available.  (Ex. 18)  
26. On December 8, 2016, the City sent the Appellant a letter pursuant  to G.L. c. 31, s. 386 
indicating that the Appellant had vol untarily and permanently separated himself from 
employment with the City.  (Ex. 16)  
27. After the City sent the Appellant the separation letter under G.L. c. 31, s. 38, the City 
learned that the Appe llant had attended a matter in Lawrence District Court as an LPD 
                                                           
6 Under G.L. c. 31, s. 38, an “… unauthorized absence shall mean an absence from work for a period of more than 
fourteen days for which no notice has been given to the appointing authority by the employee or by a person 
authorized to do so, and which may not  be charged to vacation or sick leave, or for which no leave was granted 
pursuant to the provisions of section thirty -seven.”  
 9 
 police officer.  (Ex. 17)   The City concluded that while the Appellant failed to report for 
scheduled duty, the Appellant’s court appearance  in connection with LPD matters 
constituted a brea k in the sequence of the Appellant’s absences from work under G.L. c. 
31, s. 38.  (Testimony of Fitzpatrick; Ex. 18)  
28. By letter dated January 3, 2017 , the City rescinded the Appellant’s termination under 
G.L. c. 31, s. 38.  (Ex. 18)  The City paid the Appellant back pay for the period December 
8, 2016 to January 10, 2017.  (Testimony of Fitzpatrick)   
29. The Appellant returned to work on January 10, 2017  and by a letter of the same date, the 
Mayor informed the Appellant that he was being p laced on paid administrative leave 
pending an investigation  regarding the Appellant’s alleged  violation of Rules 1.1.1, 1.5.1 , 
7.3.1 , 7.9.1 , 7.11.2, 8.23.2  and other Rules cited.  (Ex. 19)   The Rules listed here, in 
effect in November and December 2016 , provide:  
Rule 1.1.1, “Absent Without Leave”, “Members shall not be absent from duty 
without permission for a proper reasons and only for a limited time.  A 
Commanding Officer of the Chief of Police may excuse a member from reporting 
or being present for duty.” (Ex. 28)  
 
Rule 1.5.1, “[o]nly the appointing authority (the Mayor) may grant a leave of 
absence, with or without pay.  A request for a leave of absence must be made in 
writing, stating fully the reasons for the request and shall be submitted to the 
Mayor and copied to the Chief of Police.  Leaves will be granted in accordance 
with M.G.L. c. 31, s. 37.”  (Ex. 28) 
 
Rule 7.3.1, members shall not engage in the commission of any felony or 
misdemeanor.  (Ex. 28)  
 
Rule 7.9.1, members shall not be insubordinate, which “shall include: Any 
disrespectful, mutinous, insolent, or abuse language or action toward a Superior 
Officer ….”  (Ex. 28)  
 
Rule 7.11.2 ( Ex. 28 - supra ) 
 
Rule 8.23.2 ( Ex. 28 - supra ) 
 10 
 30. Then -Chief Fitzpatrick did not receive any request from t he Appellant for a leave of 
absence under LPD Rules . 7  (Testimony of Fitzpatrick)  
Charge 3 – Insubordination , Intimidation  and Untruthfulness  
31. In or about May 5, 2015, LPD officer M alleged that the Appellant committed an assault 
and batter y upon him.  Lt. Michael McCarthy was directed to conduct an investigation of 
officer  M’s allegation.  (Testimony of McCarthy ; Ex. 22)  
32. In connection with the assault and battery investigation, and in response to the request  of 
officer M, Lt. McCarthy filed an application for a criminal complaint against the 
Appellant and requested a Clerk Magistrate’s hearing.  The Appellant was served notice 
of such application in hand at the LPD.  (Testimony of McCarthy; Exs. 20 – 25)  
33. On November 10, 2015, shortly after the Appellant was served with the criminal 
complaint in connection with officer M’s allegations  that the Appellant committed an 
assault and battery on him, the Appellant sent an email message to Lt. McCarthy about 
the Department’s investigation.  The email  message stated, in part, that the investigation 
was taking too long, in comparison to the Mass. State Police investigation of the 
Appellant’s prior claim against LPD officer S; white officers do not receive the same 
level of scrutiny  as minority officers ; the Department maintains secret files , refus ing to 
comply with related Massachusetts laws and LPD’s contractual obligations ; and the 
Department “engages is (sic) wholesale racial discrimination”.  (Ex. 23)  
34. Shortly after the Appellant sent the email messag e to Lt. McCarthy , he phoned Lt. 
McCarthy com plaining about the investigation and he told Lt. Mc Carthy that he did not 
want the Lieutenant “to become collateral damage” as a result of the investigation.  Lt. 
                                                           
7 The Appellant previously requested and received leave under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act , Pub.L. 
103-3, but the lea ve period lapsed.  (Testimony of Fitzpatrick)  11 
 McCarthy understood the Appellant’s comment about “collateral damage” to be a threat 
to him (McCarthy) as the investigating officer.  (Ex. 21)  
35. Lt. McCarthy immediately reported the Appellant’s “collateral damage” statement s to 
then-Chief Fitzpatrick.  By a  letter dated December 18, 2015, the Appellant received 
written notice that he would be the subject of an investigative interview  on Dec. 22, 2015 
regarding his comments to Lt. McCarthy.  (Exs. 20, 21, 23 – 25).  The notice further 
indicated that 1) the su bject of the in terview was alleged violation of the law, 
intimidation of a witness and insubordination ; 2) the Appellant has the right against self -
incrimination , which he may invoke at any time,  and the right to “legal and union 
representation”; 3) the interview will be “solely administrative in nature”  and it may 
result in the Appellant’s discipline , including dismissal; 4)  if the Appellant refused to 
testify or answer questions he w ould be subject to discipline ; and 5) the Appellant’s 
statements c annot be used against him in a criminal proceeding, except for false 
statements, but they may be used in a subsequent L PD charge.    (Ex. 25)   
36. On December 21, 2015, Chief Fitzpatrick conducted a recorded interview  of Lt. 
McCarthy  for approximately one -half hour .  At this interview, Lt. McCarthy recalled 
specific details about the email message he had received from the Appellant on 
November 10 , 2015  about the investigation of the Appellant’s alleged assault and battery 
investigation of another  LPD  officer and the Appellant’s phone call to him after he sent 
Lt. McCarthy the email  message .  Lt. McCarthy also said at the interview that he took the 
email as a criticism of how he had handled the investigation .  Lt. McCarthy recalled 
when the Appellant called him shortly after he received the Appellant’s critical email 
message and that the Appellant said the email was not meant for Lt. McCarthy, that Lt. 12 
 McCarthy had always treated him fairly and that Lt. McCar thy told the Appellant he was 
offended by the email message.  Lt. McCarthy further recalled in his interview that the 
Appellant said in the phone call that he did not want to see Lt. McCa rthy become 
“collateral damage”, that he asked the Appellant to repea t that statement , and that the 
Appellant repeated it. In his interview, Lt. McCarthy added that he understood the 
Appellant’s “collateral damage” statements to mean that something bad could happen to 
him (Lt. McCarthy) because of his investigation of the A ppellant , whether it would 
involve a lawsuit against Lt. McCarthy or other action taken against him.  (Ex. 26)    
37. On December 22, 2015, Chief Fitzpatrick interviewed the Appellant.  The interview was 
recorded by the Chief and, by agreement, by the Appellant.  Also present  were Capt. 
Scott McNamara and O fficer Robert Moody, the Appellant’s shift union steward. At the 
15-20 minute interview, much of the time involved then -Chief Fitzpatr ick repeating the 
information in the December 18 letter informing the Appellant of his rights and related 
discussion, with Chief Fitzpatrick stating that he had no intention of pursuing criminal 
charges against the Appellant for witness intimidation but th at the Chief could not 
“guarantee” that another entity would not prosecute him.8  Chief Fitzpatrick further 
stated, in part,  
“[y]ou are required to answer all questions asked of you honestly and truthfully  
and to the best of your knowledge.  Failure to do  so will result in disciplinary 
action up to and including dismissal.  The intentional making of false statements 
or reports and/or the intentional omission of significant or pertinent facts is 
considered untruthfulness  and will be treated as such.”  (Ex. 27, p. 6 ) 
 
At one point  in the interview , there was some discussion about consulting a union 
attorney by phone.  Officer Moody indica ted that he had spoken to a union attorney the 
night before this interview but that union attorneys were un available.  The Appellant  
                                                           
8 The Appellant was not prosecuted for intimidation of a witness.  (Testimony of Appellant)  13 
 remained at the interview and answered a number of questions  about the email he had 
sent to Lt. McCarthy and the phone call he made to Lt. McCarthy .  He did not invoke his 
right against self -incrimination during this interview.  Although he asked  Chief 
Fitzpatrick if he needed an attorney, the Appellant did not ask to reschedule the 
interview.  (Ex. 27) The Appellant had experience with similar interviews and he did not 
see the need for an attorney for the interview with Chief Fitzpatrick. (Testim ony of 
Appellant) In response to Chief Fitzpatrick’s questions, t he Appellant stated at the 
interview that he recalled that he had  had a phon e conversation with Lt. McCarthy after 
he sent him an email message complaining about the assault and bat tery investigation , 
that he recalled telling McCarthy that he always treated the Appellant fairly and that the 
Appellant recalled McCarthy telling him that the Appellant’s complaint about the 
investigation was now in writing.  Then -Chief Fitzpatrick also specif ically asked the 
Appellant if he told Lt. McCarthy that he “may be collateral damage in the process of this 
investigation”.  (Ex. 27, p. 6) The Appellant answered, “I don’t remember saying that 
.…”  ( Id.), even t hough Lt. McCarthy stated in his interview t hat the Appellant said it 
once and, when Lt. McCarthy asked the Appellant to repeat the statement, the Appellant 
said it a second time .  (Exs. 26 and 27; Testimony of Fitzpatrick )   Chief Fitzpatrick 
found that the Appellant ’s response to his question at the interview was untruthful .     
(Testimony of Fitzpatrick)   
38. Under the LPD Rules in effect prior to March 7, 2016, Chapter 28, section 2 provide d 
that officers may be disciplined for “offenses and violations includ[ing]”,  
 “s. 2(m) Insubordination or disrespect toward an officer of rank  … 
s. 2(u) Violation of the law or of any ordinance of the city or any rule or 
regulation  having the force of law of any board officer, (sic) or Commissioner 14 
 having power to make rules and reg ulations.”  (Ex. 29)  
 
 In addition, Chapter 29, s. 2 of the LPD Rules  prior to March 7, 2016 provided that,  
Members of the Department shall conform to and abide by the Rules and 
Regulations of the Department, observe the laws and ordinances in force in the  
City of Lawrence, and render their services to the City with zeal, courage, 
discretion and fidelity.  He must have the following qualifications: …  
 
 (d) Be truthful at all time  (sic) whether under oath or not. …” (Ex. 29)  
  
39. The criminal complaint in court against the Appellant for allegedly assaulting LPD  
officer M was dismissed in M arch 2017 . While the criminal complaint was pending in 
court, the LPD did not pursue disciplinary action against the Appellant  for the alleged 
assault and battery in order to avoid the Appellant’s invoking of his rights against self -
incrimination during the LPD’s discipline investigation.  (Testimony of Fitzgerald)   
History of Discipline9 
40. The Appellant’s prior discipline includes:  
February 2009  -  the Appellant received a one (1) -day suspension for being absent 
without leave and insubordination for using sick leave when he did not have sick 
leave time available.  (Ex. 30)  
 
February 2014  - the Appellant received a ninety (90) -day suspension for 
misappropriating the City’s funds from outside club details  that paid officers in 
cash.  (Ex. 31 ) 
 
November 2014  -  the Appellant received a two (2) -day suspension for leaving an 
arrested prisoner unguarded and allowing him to escape.  (Ex. 32)  
 
May 2015, the Appellant received  a reprimand for failing to provide police 
reports in a complete and timely manner.  (Ex. 33)  
 
November 2015, the Appellant received a two (2) -day suspension for 
insubordination for putting LPD internal personnel matters on social med ia.  (Ex. 
                                                           
9 The Appellant, who is African -American, filed a complaint with the Mass. Commission Against Discrimination 
(MCAD) in July 2014 alleging  that the city of L awrence , the LPD and certain members of the LPD discriminated 
against him, in part, when they disciplined him  in regard to certain matters .  In April 2017, MCAD issued a ruling 
finding that the complaint lacked probable cause, which finding Mr. Green could then  appeal.  (Ex. 36)   There is no 
indication in the record whether the Appellant appealed the MCAD 2017 ruling.  15 
 34) 
 
Termination of Appellant’s Employment  
41.  By a detailed letter dated March 20, 2017, Mayor Rivera  informed  the Appellant that a 
hearing would be held at 10 a.m. on April 11, 2017  to address allegations that the 
Appellant violated cited  LPD Rules when he,  
1) arrived late in improper uniform at the  November 2, 2016 day-long detail in a 
troubled location in the city, he expressed anger when ordered to produce a to -
from memo to explain his late arrival and he left the detail approximately 
twenty (20) minutes after he arrived even though he was instructed to remain 
at the detail until a replacement could arrive;  
 
2) was AWOL on November 23, 26, 27, 28 and 29, and December 2, 3 and 4 
dates that he was scheduled for duty;   
 
3) intimidated a witness and wa s insubordinate to Lt. McCarthy when Lt. 
McCarthy  investigated allegations that the Appellant committed an assault 
and battery on officer M, twice telling Lt. McCarthy that he (McCarthy) could 
be “collateral damage” for investigating the criminal allegatio n against the 
Appellant and reporting the matter to court for prosecution ; and     
 
4) was untruthful when he told then -Chief Fitzpatrick that he did not recall 
telling Lt. McCarthy that he (Lt. McCarthy) may become “collateral damage” 
in connection with his investigation of the Appellant.  
 
(Ex. 1)  
 
42. The hearing was held on April 21, 2017.   (Exs. 1 and 3)  While the hearing officer was 
reading the Mayor’s notice of hearing into the record  at the beginning of the hearing , 
union Attorney Dwyer asked to speak with the Appellant.  The two (2) left the hearing 
room  at or around 10:43 a.m.   Attorney Dwyer returned  alone , remained in the hearing 
room and informed the hearing officer that the Appellant did not want to participate in 
the hearing.  The hearing officer indi cated that the hearing would go forward as 
scheduled and there were no objections to proceeding.  Then -Chief Fitzpatrick was the 
only witness.  The hearing officer entered thirty (30) exhibits into the record for the 16 
 Respondent and nine (9) for the union.  In his eight (8) -page report to the Mayor, the 
hearing officer listed numerous findings of fact , accepted the recommendation of then -
Chief Fitzpatrick to terminate the Appellant’s employment,  and concluded that the 
Respondent established by a preponderanc e of the evidence that ,  
1) the Appellant was late for the November 2, 2016 detail, he was not in uniform 
and he abandoned the detail in violation of LPD Rules 7.1.2 and 8.23.2;    
 
2) the Appellant was absent without leave on November 23, 26, 27, 28, 29 and 
December 2, 3 and 4 (2016)10 in violation of LPD Rules 1.1.1 and 1.5.1 ; and  
 
3) the Appellant made inappropriate statements to Lt. McCarthy in the course of 
his investigation of another officer’s allegation that the Appellant committed 
an assault and battery  on him; such statements were “unacceptable, 
insubordinate and unprofessional” and  were intended  “to intimidate, threaten, 
and influence Lt. McCarthy’s participation” in the assault and battery 
investigation “which  … a reasonable person would readily have  construed as 
threatening and intimidating” ; and the Appellant was untruthful  to then-Chief 
Fitzpatrick  when he interviewed the Appellant regarding the Appellant’s 
inappropriate statements to Lt. McCarthy, all in violation of LPD Rules 
Chapter 28, s. 2(m)  and 2(u) and Chapter 29, s. 2(d), and G.L. c. 208, s. 
13B(1)(intimidation of a witness).     
 
(Ex. 3)  
 
43. By letter dated May 10, 2017, the Mayor informed the Appellant that he had reviewed 
and accepted the hearing officer’s report and, therefore, was terminating the Appellant’s 
employment on May 12, 2017.  The Mayor’s letter suggests that each of the violations 
warrant termination of the Appellant’s employment.11  (Ex. 4)  
 
                                                           
10 The hearing officer’s re port states that the Appellant was also absent without leave on December 5, 2016.  
However, December 5 is the date on which the Appellant appeared in court  on an LPD matter , although he did not 
report for duty to the LPD after his court appearance . Based o n the Appellant’s appearance in court on December 5 , 
the Respondent retracted its prior notice to the Appellant that he had been deemed to have voluntarily abandoned his 
job under G.L. c. 31, s. 38.       
11 The third paragraph of the Mayor’s letter begins,  “Each of the above -cited violations, collectively and separately, 
together with your prior disciplinary record, which includes a one day suspension …”  (Ex. 4)  The rest of the 
sentence lists some of the Appellant’s disciplinary record but does not comple te the sentence  to indicate that each of 
the Appellant’s violations found here warrant the Appellant’s termination.  The Respondent’s post -hearing brief 
asserts  that each such violation warrants termination.   17 
 Applicable Law  
 A tenured civil service employee may be discharged for “just cause” after due notice and  
hearing upon written decision “which shall state fully and specifically the reasons therefore.”  
G.L. c. 31, s. 41.  An employee aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the Commission. G.L. c. 
31, s. 43.  Under section 43, the ap pointing authority carries burden to prove to the Commission 
by a “preponderance of the evidence” that there was “just cause” for the action taken. Id.; see 
e.g., Falmouth v. Civil Serv. Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006);  Police Dep’t of Boston v. 
Collins , 48 Mass.App.Ct. 411, rev.den. , 726 N.E.2d 417 (2000).   Under G.L. c. 31, s. 42, a 
person  who believes that an appointing authority has failed to follow the procedural requirements 
of G.L .c. 31, s. 41 relating to disciplinary matters may file an appeal at this Commission.   
 The Commission determines justification for discipline by inquiring, "whether the 
employee has been guilty of substantial misconduct which adversely affects the public interest 
by impairing the efficiency of public service."  School Comm. v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 
Mass.App.Ct. 486, 488, rev.den ., 426 Mass. 1104 (1997);  Murray v. Second Dist. Ct. , 389 Mass. 
508, 514 (1983).  An action is “justified” if it is "done upon adequate reasons sufficiently 
supported by credible evidence, wh en weighed by an unprejudiced mind; guided by common 
sense and by correct rules of law.”  Commissioners of Civil Service v. Municipal Ct. of Boston , 
359 Mass. 211, 214 (1971);  Cambridge v. Civil Service Common , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 300, 304, 
rev.den ., 426 Mass . 1102, (1997);  Selectmen of Wakefield v. Judge of First Dist. Ct. , 262 Mass. 
477 (1928).   
 The Commission must take account of all credible evidence in the entire administrative 
record, including whatever would fairly detract from the weight of any part icular supporting 
evidence. See, e.g.,  Massachusetts Ass’n of Minority Law Enforcement Officers v. Abban , 434 18 
 Mass. 256, 264 -65 (2001).     
 The Commission is guided by “the principle of uniformity and the ‘equitable  
treatment of similarly situated individ uals’ [both within and across different appointing 
authorities]” as well as the “underlying purpose of the civil service system ‘to guard against  
political considerations, favoritism and bias in governmental employment decisions.’ ”  Town of  
Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006) and cases cited.  It is also a basic  
tenet of the “merit principle” which governs Civil Service Law that discipline must be remedial,  
not punitive, designed to “correct inadequate performance” and “separating  employees whose  
inadequate performance cannot be corrected.” G.L. c. 31, s.1. 
 G.L. c. 31, § 43 vests the Commission with authority to affirm, vacate or modify a 
penalty imposed by the appointing authority. The Commission is delegated with “considerable 
discretion” in this regard, albeit “not without bounds” so long as the Commission  provides a 
rational explanation for how it has arrived at its decision to do so.  See e.g ., Police Comm’r v. 
Civil Service Comm’n , 39 Mass.App.Ct. 594, 600 (1996) and cases cited; Falmouth v. Civil 
Service Comm’n , 61 Mass.App.Ct. 796, 800 (2004); Faria v.  Third Bristol Div. , 14 
Mass.App.Ct. 985, 987 (1982)(remanded for findings to support modification) .  However, the 
Supreme Judicial Court has added,  
“Unless the commission’s findings of fact differ significantly from those reported by the 
town or interpre t the relevant law in a substantially different way, the absence of political 
considerations, favoritism, or bias would warrant essentially the same penalty.”  
Town of Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm'n , 447 Mass. 81 5, 824. 
 
 Further, “[t]he Commission is permitted, but not required, to draw an adverse inference 
against an appellant , as is the case here,  who fails to testify at the hearing before the appointing 
authority ….”  Merricks v Boston Police Department , 31 MCSR 169  (2018), citing  Town of 
Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm'n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006).   See also  Clark v. Boston 19 
 Housing Authority , 24 MCSR 193 (2011), Clark v. Boston Housing Authority , Suffolk Superior 
Court, C.A. No. SUCV2011 -2554E, aff’d (Feb. 13, 2015).  
Analysis    
 The Respondent has established by a preponderance of the evidence that it had just cause 
to discipline the Appellant based on his violation of the cited LPD R ules. With regard to the 
November 2, 2016 detail, there appears to be no dispute that the Appellan t arrived at the detail 
approximately seventeen minutes late , he was not wearing his hat and badge  and he walked off 
the detail approximately twenty (20) minutes after he arrived . Upset with Sgt. Picard’s order to 
write a to/from memo explaining his tardin ess, the Appellant said he was leaving the detail.  In 
view of the recent shootings in the detail neighborhood, Sgt. Picard told the Appellant that there 
could be no gap in time in detail coverage.  The Appellant contacted the detail coordinator and 
inform ed him that he was leaving the detail.  The Appellant left the detail approximately twenty 
(20) minutes after he arrived, prior to the arrival of his replacement, notwithstanding Sgt. 
Picard’s instruction .  The Appellant had not asked for leave to depart p rior to the replacement’s 
arrival.   
 The Appellant argues that he should not be disciplined in connection with the November 
2 detail for a variety of reasons.  The Appellant was assigned to a detail at the Health Center 
where there had been recent shootings.  Regarding his tardiness at this detail for the Health 
Center, the Appellant avers that he was not at the L PD offices on November 1, 2016 when the 
new details policy was issued and, therefore, did not know about it even though it had also been 
emailed to all members of the Department.  The Appellant also asserts that he was angry when 
Sgt. Picard ordered him to write a to/from memo explaining the reason for his tardiness because 
she allegedly used profanity when she ordered him to write the memo.  Further, the Appellant 20 
 asserts that it was common practice to leave a detail before a replacement arrived.  None of the 
Appellant’s arguments in this regard are availing.  It cannot be a defense to tardiness that an 
officer did not know of a policy to be on time when officers are scheduled for details for specific 
time periods.  The Appellant was not treated in a disparate manner because Sgt. Picard also 
ordered another officer to write a to/from memo for being late for a detail that day.  Any 
concerns tha t the Appellant had about Sgt. Picard’s manner of delivery of the order to write the 
memo could have been conveyed through appropriate channels after the Appellant complied with 
the order, not by leaving a detail like the one at the Health Center, where th ere had been trouble 
recently, before a replacement has arrived and because, as the Appellant argues, other officers do 
it.   Thus, the Appellant’s arguments lack merit.   
 There also appears to be no dispute that the Appellant was absent without leave on 
November 23 , 26, 27, 28, 29 and December 2, 3 and 4, 2016  when he was scheduled to work . In 
fact, it wasn’t until November 27, 2016  that the Appellant even contacted the LPD to indicate 
that he would not be reporting for duty, alleging that he was sick.  W hen he called, the Appellant 
spoke to Sgt. Aguilar, the Platoon Officer in charge.  Sgt. Aguilar learned that the Appellant had 
no remaining sick leave or other leave available and called the Appellant back to say that  he was 
required to report for duty or  he would be marked AWOL.  The Appellant responded that he 
needed to make some calls and would call the Sergeant back.  Sgt. Aguilar told the Appellant 
about the potential disciplinary consequences that the Appellant faced if he failed to report to 
work. T he Appellant indicated that he was aware of the potential consequences but added “let the 
department do whatever it wants to do.”  (Ex. 14)  The next day, the Appellant went to the office 
of Lt. Fleming, the Officer in Charge and told him he would not be r eturning to work in the 
“foreseeable future”.   Lt. Fleming asked the Appellant to clarify if he was refusing to work and 21 
 the Appellant said “until things get resolved, I won’t be coming to work”, without explaining 
what needed to be resolved.  (Ex. 15)  O n December 8, 2016, with the Appellant having failed to 
return to work, the Respondent sent the Appellant a letter stating that the Appellant had 
voluntarily and permanently abandoned his job and that he may request a hearing within ten (10) 
days, pursuant  to G.L. c. 31, s. 38.  When the Appellant provided proof that he had appeared in 
court, on LPD business, on December 5 (although he did not report to the Department before or 
after his court appearance that day), interrupting the period of time in which h e failed to report 
for duty as scheduled, the Respondent rescinded the notice under G.L. c. 31, s. 38 and 
compensated him for the time between December 8, 2016 and January 10, 2017.  The Appellant 
argues that  he did not show up for his scheduled duty because he was assigned to the LPD front 
desk duty, which he asserts constitutes punishment duty, which is prohibited under G.L. c. 31, ss. 
62 and 62A.12   
 The Appellant’s arguments against the Respondent’s findin gs that he was AWOL for 
work scheduled over a two (2) -week period lack merit.  As indicated in then -Chief Fitzpatrick’s 
testimony at the Commission hearing and in work assignment records (Ex. 11) , desk duty does 
not constitute punishment duty.  Moreover, r epeatedly failing to appear for scheduled work, not 
requesting leave, and telling the LPD that you will not return “for the foreseeable future” is 
simply not an option for any employee , especially not for a p olice officer.  T hat the Appellant 
waited until the third day that he was AWOL to even contact the Department  to tell them that he 
would not report to work  and that he then told his superior that he would not report for scheduled 
duty for an unspecified time is inexcusable and constitutes substantial misconduct which 
                                                           
12 At the Commission, the Appellant testified t hat he asked the union to grieve his front desk assignment but that it 
refused to do so because the front desk duty is a police duty.  The Appellant asserted that he subsequently filed a 
claim that the union failed to represent him.  There is no indication  in the record of the result of the Appellant’s 
claim against the union.    22 
 adversely affects the public interest by impairing the efficiency of public service  and war rants 
discipline.  
 The Respondent also established by a preponderance of the evidence that the Appellant 
was insubordinat e and that he intimidat ed a superior officer .  After Lt. McCarthy conducted an 
investigation of another officer’s allegation that the Appellant had committed assault and battery 
on him, he presented his findings to court and criminal charges against the Appellant issued.  
Upon recei ving the criminal complaint against him, the Appellant sent an email message to Lt. 
McCarthy  with highly critical statements about Lt. McCarthy’s investigation that lead to the 
issuance of the criminal complaint against the Appellant.  The email message wa s copied to two 
(2) other members of the LPD.  Within minutes of sending Lt. McCarthy the email message, the 
Appellant called Lt. McCarthy and twice said that he did not want McCarthy to become 
“collateral damage” for having led the investigation that led to the issuance of a criminal 
complaint to the Appellant.  Lt. McCarthy stated that he found the Appellant’s repeated reference 
to “collateral damage” to be an attempt to intimidate him and that he (Lt. McCarthy) did not 
want anything bad to happen, such as being sued by the Appellant  for having conducted the 
investigation of the Appellant.  Lt. McCarthy promptly informed then -Chief Fitzpatrick of what 
the Appellant had done and Chief Fitzpatrick sent the Appellant detailed not ice that he would be 
conducting investigative interviews, explaining the subject of the interview and the Appellants 
rights in connection with the interview.  I find that the Appellant’s highly critical email message 
to Lt. McCarthy constitutes insubordina tion and that it was unprofessional and disrespectful .  
Further, I find that the Appellant’s phone call to Lt. McCarthy, with repeated references to 
“collateral damage”, constitutes intimidation of Lt. McCarthy as the officer who conducted the 
investigatio n that led to the issuance of criminal charges against the Appellant.  The Appellant’s 23 
 argument here is that the LPD did not make specific findings regarding insubordination and 
intimidation  prior to the Respondent’s local hearing.  Since the Appellant was notified by the 
Respondent that these issues would be addressed at the local hearing, the Appellant  was provided 
sufficient notice in this regard.  Having left the local hearing shortly after it began, the Appellant 
missed the opportunity to address this a nd the other reasons the Respondent provided for his 
discipline and , for that reason, I draw an adverse inference from his failure to participate in the 
local hearing.   
 The Respondent also established by a preponderance of the evidence that  the Appellant  
was untruthful when then -Chief Fitzpatrick interviewed him about the highly critical email 
message he sent to Lt. McCarthy and the phone call that the Appellant made to Lt. McCarthy 
shortly after he sent the critical email message.  In the interview, Chie f Fitzpatrick asked the 
Appellant what he recalled of his phone call with Lt. McCarthy  following the email he sent him .  
While the Appellant recalled certain details of the phone call, he stated that he did not recall 
telling Lt. McCarthy that he did not w ant him to become “collateral damage”, certainly a 
memorable phrase, even though Lt. McCarthy credibly reported that he asked him to repeat it 
and he did repeat it.  Since Lt. McCarthy promptly reported to then -Chief Fitzpatrick what the 
Appellant said to him and the phone call between Lt. McCarthy and the Appellant occurred 
shortly after the Appellant received the criminal  complaint, which was based on Lt. McCarthy’s 
investigation, I find it more likely than not that the Appellant was untruthful during his interview 
with Chief Fitzpatrick in which that he said that he did not remember telling Lt. McCarthy that 
he (Lt. McCar thy) may be “collateral damage” in connection with the investigation of the 
Appellant.   
 Having found that there was just cause for discipline, we must now address whether  24 
 modification of the discipline issued is warranted.   The Respondent terminated the  Appellant’s 
employment based on his conduct at the November 2 , 2016 security detail , including his 
tardiness, lack of complete uniform and abandonment of the detail prior to arrival of his 
replacement despite Sgt. Picard’s instruction ; his absence  without  leave on certain days in 
November and December 2016, telling the Department that he would not return for the 
“foreseeable future”; his intimidation of, and insubordination toward a superior officer; and his 
untruthfulness to the Police Chief when the Chie f interviewed the Appellant regarding the 
Appellant’s insubordina tion and intimidation of Lt. McCarthy . While the Appellant’s tardiness 
and lack of complete uniform at the November 2, 2016 detail constitute substa ntial misconduct 
that adversely affects the public interest by impairing the efficiency of such public service , it 
does not typically warrant termination.  However, the Appellant’s abandonment of the detail 
prior to the arrival of his replacement, knowing that there had been r ecent shootings in the area, 
certainly constitutes substantial misconduct as it jeopardizes public safety, when securing the 
public safety is the essence of a police officer’s job and warrants discipline that reflect the 
seriousness of such misconduct.  I also find that the Appellant’s subsequent failure to report to 
work as scheduled for a number of days in November and December, 2016, his intimidation of 
and insubordination to Lt. McCarthy  in connection with his investigation of the Appellant , and 
his unt ruthfulness to the Police Chief each constitute grave misconduct that adversely affect the 
public interest by impairing the efficiency of public service.  Such misconduct is especially 
intolerable in a police department.  Combined, the Appellant’s actions  and/or failure to act, 
justify the most serious discipline meted out by the Respondent.   Furthermore, since the findings 
here do not differ significantly from those rendered by the Respondent, there is no reason to 
modify the discipline issued by the Resp ondent.     25 
  Finally, the Appellant alleges that his termination was the result of political bias against 
him.  However, at the Commission hearing, the Appellant  admitted that he is “outspoken”,  
having criticized the LPD at local government meetings , and he asserted that he was running for 
Mayor  against Mayor Rivera.  While we enjoy free speech, our public statements have 
consequences.  That said, I find no evidence of bias  here.  Rather, unfortunately, the Appellant 
has provided the Respondent with multip le reasons which  provide just cause for discipline.        
Conclusion  
 For all of the above -stated reasons, the Appellant’s appeal under Docket No. D1 -17-104, 
filed pursuant to G.L. c. 31, ss. 42 and 43,  is deni ed.    
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
/s/ Cynthia A. Ittleman  
Cynthia A. Ittleman   
Commissioner  
 
By vote of the Civil Service Commission (Bowman, Chairman; Camuso, Ittleman, Stein and 
Tivnan, Commissioners ) on December 19, 2019.     
   
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration within ten days of  the receipt of the Commission’s decision.  
Under the pertinent provisions of the Code of Mass. Regulations, 801 CMR 1.01(7)(l), the motion must identify a 
clerical or mechanical error in the decision or a significant factor the Agency or the Presiding Off icer may have 
overlooked in deciding the case. A motion for reconsideration shall be deemed a motion for rehearing in accordance 
with G.L. c. 30A, § 14(1) for the purpose of tolling the time for appeal.  
 
Under the provisions of G.L c. 31, § 44, any party a ggrieved by a final decision or order of the Commission may 
initiate proceedings for judicial review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior court within thirty (30) days after 
receipt of such order or decision. Commencement of such proceeding shall not, u nless specifically ordered by the 
court, operate as a stay of the Commission’s order or decision. After initiating proceedings for judicial review in 
Superior Court, the plaintiff, or his / her attorney, is required to serve a copy of the summons and compl aint upon 
the Boston office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, with a copy to the Civil Service Commission, in 
the time and in the manner prescribed by Mass. R. Civ. P. 4(d).  
Notice to:  
William Green (Appellant)  
Robert D. Hillman,  Esq. (for Respo ndent)  