COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
 
 
ANGELA HALCOVICH ,         
 Appellant,                 Docket No.:  D1-17-158 
                      
v.                  
                  
CITY OF REVERE ,     
 Respondent                 
 
Appearance for Appellant:     Robert A. Boncore , Esq.  
       Boncore Law Office  
1140 Saratoga Street  
East Boston, MA 02128  
 
Appearance for Respondent:     Matthew J. Buckley, Esq.  
       Law Office of Matthew J. Buckley  
       238 Powderhouse Blvd.  
       Somerville, MA 02144  
 
Commissioner:      Cynthia Ittleman  
 
 
DECISION  
 
Angela Halcovich (Ms. Halcovich or Appellant) filed the instant appeal at the Civil 
Service Commission (Commission) on August 8, 2017 under G.L. c. 31, s. 43, challenging the 
decision of the City of Revere (Respondent) to terminate her employment as a police officer.  A 
prehearing conference was held on October 3, 2017 at the offices of the Commission in Boston.  
A full hearing1 was held on January 10, 2018 at the same location.   The hearing was deemed to 
be private since I did not receive a request from either party for a public hearing.  The witnesses 
were sequestered.  The hearing was digitally recorded and the parties receiv ed a CD of the 
                                                 
1 The Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure, 810 CMR ss. 1.00, et seq., apply to adjudications 
before the Commission, with G.L. Chapte r 31, or any Commission rules taking precedence.   2 recording. 2  The parties submitted post -hearing briefs.  For the reasons stated herein, the appeal 
is denied.         
FINDINGS OF FACT  
 Thirty (30) exhibits were entered into evidence at the hearing .3  At the hearing, the parties 
were ordere d to produce court documents concerning a restra ining order that the Appellant 
obtained  at or about the time of the incidents that led to the Appellant’s termination of 
employment and the transcript of the State Police interview of the Appellant.  The Appe llant 
produced the court record of the restraining order, which was entered into the record and marked 
as Appellant’s Post -Hearing Exhibit  (A.PH.Ex.)  1.  The Appellant advised that the transcript 
could not be prepared in a timely manner so the Appellant wi thdrew the request to include it in 
the record.  Based on all of th e exhibits, the testimony of the following witnesses:   
Called by the Respondent:  
 James Guido, Chief, Revere Police Department (RPD)  
 John Goodwin, then-Lieutenant in the RPD, now Deputy Chief of the Winthrop Police  
Department (WPD)  
Called by the Appellant:  
 Angela Halcovich, Appellant  
                                                 
2 If there is a judicial appeal of this decision, the plaintiff in the judicial appeal would be obligated to supply the 
court with a transcript of this hearing to the extent that he/she wishes to challenge t he decision as unsupported by the 
substantial evidence, arbitrary and capricious, or an abuse of discretion.  If such an appeal is filed, this CD should be 
used to transcribe the hearing.  
3 The Respondent’s exhibits are Exhibits 1, 1A, 1B, 2  through 5 , 6A, 6B, 6C, and 7 through 1 3.  The Appellant’s 
exhibits are Exhibits 14, 15A, 15B, 15C, 16, 17, 18A, 18B, 19, 20, 21A, 21B, 21C, 22A, 22B, 22C and 23.   As 
noted above, the Appellant also provided a post -hearing document that was entered into the record.   In addition, I 
take administrative notice of two (2) decisions that the Respondent submitted with its post -hearing brief : Lawrence v 
Lawrence Firefighters, Local  146 IAFF , Essex Superior Court C.A. No. 2017 -0163 -B and Clancy v Brockton 
Public Schools , 18 MCSR 66 ( 2005).   
   Given the amount of personal information in many of the admitted Exhibits, at the end of the hearing I returned 
the parties’ Exhibits to them for the purpose of redacting them and they returned them, redacted, to the Commission. 
Exhi bits 6A – 6C, which are photographs of Younger Child depicting his pertinent injuries, are completely redacted.  
The other evidence in the record suffices to render this decision.                       3 And taking administrative notice of all matters filed in the case and taking administrative notice 
of pertinent statutes, case law, regulations, rules, poli cies, and reasonable inferences from the 
evidence, a preponderance of the credible evidence establishes the following facts:  
1. The Appellant was raised in Revere.  She served in the U.S. Marines from 2003 to 2007 
and was honorably discharged as a Staff Sgt. E-6, achieving five (5) promotions.  While 
in the military, she obtained a B achelor’s degree and took courses toward a M aster’s 
degree , which she completed after she was hired by the RPD as a Patrol Officer in 2014.  
The Appellant has earned a number of tr aining certifications as a member of the RPD.  
Prior to her termination, the Appellant was a tenured police officer.  She is a single parent 
of two small children.  (Testimony of Appellant ; Respondent’s Exhibit (R.Ex.) 1 ) 
2. In the beginning of 2015, the Appe llant began a friendship that developed into a romantic 
relationship with Mr. G , a fellow RPD Patrol Officer.  On the evening of January 1 2, 
2017, the Appellant was at her residence with her two children and Mr. G. (Testimony of 
Appellant ;  R.Ex. 7 )   
3. One of the children, Younger Child , refused to eat his dinner.   Mr. G told the Appellant 
he was bringing Younger Child upstairs.  ( Testimony of Appellant ) 
4. Mr. G then brought Younger Child  upstairs to his room where he struck him several 
times with a belt. (Testimony of Appellant ; R.Ex. 7) 
5. Mr. G then asked Appellant to come upstairs and she observed that Younger Child had 
bruises  and welts  on his back  and was or became aware that  the injuries were inflicted by 
a belt .  (Testimony of Appellant ). 
6. Mr. G remained at the residence for approximately twenty (20) minutes then left .  
(Testimony of Appellant , R.Ex. 8 )  4 7. The following morning, the Appellant put lotion on Younger Child’s injury from being 
stricken with a belt by Mr. G, dressed him in a hoodie and instructed him to wear it all 
day and told both Younger Child a nd Older Child  to say , if anyone asked them about  the 
hoodie, that Younger Child fell down the stairs .   (Testimony of Appellant ; R.Ex. 8 ) 
8. The Appellant then brought her children to school, and reported to work at RPD.  
(Testimony of Appellant)  
9. That morning , Younger Child  asked the school nurse for a band -aid for his back .  The 
nurse observed extensive bruising on his front and back torso, arms, and neck and took 
photo graphs  of his injuries.4  (R.Exs. 6A-6C)  
10. Younger Child  told the school staff that he fell down the stairs at home and that his 
mother, the Appellant , had put lotion on his injuries.   (R.Exs. 5 and 7)  
11. Younger Child ’s school contacted the Appellant, who arrived at the school shortly 
thereafter and was shown his injuries.  The Appellant said that she was unaware of the 
bruising but stated that Younger Child must have i njured himself w hen he fell down the 
stairs a few days ago.  The Appellant told the school nurse she would be t ake him to his 
pediatrician at Beth Israel Hospital -Revere.   (Testimony of Appellant ; R.Exs. 5, 7 and 8) 
12. The school nurse, as a mandat ed reporter  under G.L. c. 119, s. 51 A, contacted the 
Massachusetts Department of Children and Families (“DCF”) to investig ate the matter.  
(R.Exs. 5, 7 and 8)  
13. DCF contacted the Suffolk County District Attorney’s Office to investigate the physical 
abuse o f Younger Child .  Det ective  Lieutenant John Lannon (“Det . Lannon”) , of the 
                                                 
4 The photographs of Younger Child are not in the recor d but there appears to be no dispute that he was injured as a 
result of being struck with a belt on the night of January 12, 2017.   5 Massachusetts State Police, assigned to the District Attorney’s Office, investigated the 
matter.   (R.Exs. 7, 8 and 10)  
14. When DCF and Det .  Lannon arrived at Beth Israel Revere, the doctor treating Younger 
Child  stated that the injuries were not consistent with falling down the stairs.  DCF then 
took custody of both of the Appellant’s children.  ( R.Ex. 10)  
15. On January 14, 2017, Det . Lannon interviewed Mr. G about the events that occurred at 
the Appellant’s residence on January 12, 2017.  ( R.Ex. 10)  
16. Mr. G was subsequently arrested and charged with assa ult and battery on a child causing 
serious bodily injury and assault and battery with a dangerous weapon. ( R.Exs. 7 and 10)5    
17. On January 15, 2017, RPD Det. Lannon and Lt. Murphy interviewed the Appellant 
regarding the events at her home on January 12, 20 17. (R.Ex. 8)  
18. The Appellant told Det. Lannon and L t. Murphy that : 
 Mr. G would help discipline her children ; 
 on January 12, 2017, she found that Mr. G had taken Younger Child  upstairs and 
struck him with a belt while she was downstairs ; and  
 
 the next morning, the Appellant instructed both her children to say that Younger 
Child  fell down the stairs if anyone asked, and for Younger Child  to keep his 
hoodie on  to hide the marks from having been struck by Mr. G .  (R.Ex. 8)  
 
19. The Appellant applied for a domestic abuse restraining order against Mr. G on January 
18, 2017.  The order w as set to  expire on February 1, 2017.  However, on January 31, 
2017, apparently at the request of both the Appellant and M r. G, the court extended the 
restraining order until  May 3, 2017.  (A.PH.Ex.1)  
                                                 
5 News reports shortly thereafter stated that Mr. G resigned from the RPD.   6 20.  In the spring of 2017, the Appellant participated in weekly meetings with a domestic 
violence counsel or and obtained psychotherapy at the VA.  (A.Exs. 21A – C, 22A -C and 
23) 
21. On January 27, 2017, t he Appellant was charged with t wo (2) counts of assault and 
battery with a dangerous weapon on a child under 14  under G.L. c. 265, s. 15A (c)(iv) 
(assault and battery with a dangerous weapon of a child under age 14) and two (2) counts 
of permitting another to commit an assault and batter y upon a child under G.L. c. 265, s. 
13J(b) (wantonly or recklessly permit another to commit an assault and battery which 
caused “bodily injury”) . (R.Exs. 8 and 9)    
22. On February 27, 2017, pursuant to G.L. c. 31, s. 41, then -Chief of the Revere Police 
Depa rtment, Joseph Cafarelli , suspended the Appellant for five (5) days without pay 
beginning February 28, 2017 and ending on March 6, 2017  for violating RPD rules 
regarding Required Conduct, Truthfulness, Reporting Violations, Situation Involving 
Off-Duty Off icer, Prohibited Conduct, Criminal Conduct and Conduct Unbecoming.  
This letter informed the Appellant that she may request a hearing within 48 hours.      
(R.Ex. 2)  The March 2017 hearing apparently was not conducted.  (Administrative 
Notice)  
23. Also o n Feb ruary 27, 2017, the Appointing Authority, Mayor Brian Arrigo , gave the 
Appellant a Notice of Hearing  to be held on March 6, 2017 indicating that he was 
contemplating taking further disciplinary action against her , up to and including 
discharge.   (R.Ex. 3)     7 24. On March 1, 2017, Lt. Goodwin submitted a  detailed investigation report of his 
investigation of Mr. G and the Appellant in connection with the January 12, 2017 -related 
events for which they were criminally charged.   (R.Ex. 10)  
25. On May 12, 2017, the Appellant ple aded  guilty to one (1) count of permitting injury to a 
child  and was sentenc ed to probation until May 10, 2019 .   The three (3) other charges 
against the Appellant , alleging that the Appellant committed an assault and battery on her 
children,  were dispose d of by nolle prosequi.  (R.Ex. 9)    
26. On June 26, 2017, Mayor Arrigo provided the Appellant with a Notice of Hearing that he 
was contemplating taking disciplinary action against her up to and including discharge  
for violating cited RPD rules in connection with the January 12, 2017 incident . (R.Ex. 4)  
27. On July 18, 2017, Mayor Arrigo designated Assistant City Solicitor Daniel Doherty to 
conduct the Appellant’s disciplinary  hearing .  (R.Ex. 1B ) 
28. On July 19, 2017, the hearing officer conducted the disc iplinary hearing.  (R.Ex. 1 A) 
29. On July 26, 2017, the hearing officer  issued his detailed report and findings and held that 
the Appellant had violated the cited RPD rules regarding criminal conduct, truthfulness , 
reporting violations, conduct unbecoming an o fficer, and situations involving off -duty 
officers.  The Appellant testified at this hearing . She asserted that Mr. G had attempted to 
control her personal and work life and, on five (5) occasions put his hands around her 
throat and/or pointed his service weapon at her .  The hearing officer explicitly made no 
finding in that regard .  (R.Ex. 1A)  
30. Attorney Doherty ’s report  found that , 
As to whether Halcovich was aware of prior incidents where [Mr. G]  had struck 
[redacted] with a belt, the evidence was conflict ing, and I make no finding either 
way on this point. … I do find, however, th at Halcovich was aware that [Mr. G]  
was going to spank [redacted] with a belt on January 12, 2017. …   8  
… under G.L. c. 31, s. 50  …  a person shall not be employed or retained in an y 
civil service position within one year after his conviction of any crime, [the 
Appellant], by virtue of her sentence of two years (sic) probation, qualifies for the 
exemption under the statute to be employed within such one -year period in the 
discretion of the appointing authority.  (R.Ex. 1A)  
 
… by virtue of [the Appellant’s] convictions of a misdemeanor punishable by 
imprisonment for more than two years she is a pr ohibited person to be issued a 
license to carry firearms pursuant to G.L. c. 140, s. 131(d) (i). … I find, based on 
the testimony of former Revere Lieutenant John Goodwin, that it is discretionary 
with the Chief o f Police whether to retain an officer who has been so disqualified 
from being issued a license to carry firearms, and that the Revere P olice 
Department currently employs two officers who are so disqualified due to 
convictions for operating under the influence of alcohol.  (R.Ex. 1A)  
 
31. By letter dated August 1, 2017, Mayor Arrigo notified the Appellant that her employment 
at the RPD was ter minated for violating cited RPD rules pertaining to truthfulness, failing 
to report violations, criminal conduct, and conduct unbecoming a police officer in 
connection with the January 12, 2017 -related events. (R.Ex. 1)    
32. Rule 301(c)(7), regarding t ruthfu lness, mandates that “[a]n officer shall truthfully state 
the facts in all oral and written reports, including all log and record books, and in any 
judicial, departmental or other official investigation, hearing, trial or proceeding. He/she 
shall cooperate  fully in all phases of such investigations, hearing, trials and proceedings 
except as the officer may elect not to testify or make statements otherwise pursuant to 
his/her constitutional or statutory rights, unless granted transactional immunity. No 
emplo yee shall knowingly enter, or cause to be entered, any inaccurate, false or improper 
information.”  ( R.Ex. 11)   
33. The Appellant viola ted Rule 301(c)(7) on January 13 , 2017, when she “falsely informed a 
mandated reporter…that [she was] not aware that [her] s on was injured and that [she] did 
not see his injuries and that his injuries must have occurred when he fell down the stairs.  9 [She] later reported similar false information to investigators from the Massachusetts 
State Police inquiring into the crime.”  ( R.Ex. 1)  
34. Rule 301(c)(19), regarding s ituations involving off duty officers, mandates that officers 
“confronted with a situation in which the conduct of an off duty police officer is in 
question shall take the proper police action and request a superior off icer respond to the 
scene.” (R.Ex. 11)  
35. The Appellant violated Rule 301(c)(19) in that she was “aware that a crime had been 
committed, i.e., assault and battery by means of a dangerous weapon on a child under 14 
and did not report that crime to the Chief o f Police as required.” (R.Ex. 1)  
36. Rule 301(D)(1) , regarding criminal conduct, mandates that “[e]mployees shall obey all 
laws of the United States, of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, all City of Revere 
ordinances and by -laws and all ordinances and by -laws of other cities and towns. An 
employee of the Department who commits any criminal act shall be subjected to 
disciplinary action up to and including discharge from the Department. Each case shall be 
considered on its own merits, and the circumstances of e ach shall be fully reviewed 
before the final action is taken.”   (R.Ex. 11)  
37. Appellant violated Rule 301(D)(1) in having “prior knowledge that a fellow officer, Mr. 
G, was going to spank [her] young child with a belt on the evening of January 12, 2017. 
Further, [she] pled guilty on May 12, 2017 to the charge of permitting injury to a child 
under 14.”  ( R.Exs. 1 and 9)  
38. Rule 301(D)(4), regarding conduct unbecoming an officer, states that “[a]ny specific type 
of conduct, which reflects discredit upon the member as a police officer, or upon his 
fellow officers, or upon the police department he serves. Employees shall conduct  10 themselves at all times, whether on or off duty, in suc h a manner as to reflect most 
honorably on the Department. Conduct unbecoming an officer shall include conduct 
which tends to indicate that the employee is unable or unfit to continue as a member of 
the Department, or conduct which impairs the operation of  the Department or its 
employees.”  (R.Ex. 11)    
39. The Appellant violated Rule 301(D)(4) in that “all of the conduct noted…in the 
suspension letter and Hearing Officer’s Report and Findings is c onduct which reflects 
discredit  upon [her] as a police officer a s well as to the entire Revere Police Department.” 
(R.Ex. 11)  
40. The Appellant filed the instant appeal with the Commission on August 9, 2017. 
(Administrative Notice)  
Applicable Civil Service Law  
G.L. c. 31, s. 43 provides:  
 
“If the commission by a preponderance of the evidence determines that there was just 
cause for an action taken against such person it shall affirm the action of the appointing 
authority, otherwise it shall reverse such action and the person concerned shall  be 
returned to his position without loss of compensation or other rights; provided, however, 
if the employee by a preponderance of evidence, establishes that said action was based 
upon harmful error in the application of the appointing authority’s procedu re, an error of 
law, or upon any factor or conduct on the part of the employee not reasonably related to 
the fitness of the employee to perform in his position, said action shall not be sustained, 
and the person shall be returned to his position without lo ss of compensation or other 
rights. The commission may also modify any penalty imposed by the appointing 
authority.”  
 
An action is “justified” if it is “done upon adequate reasons sufficiently supported by 
credible evidence, when weighed by an unprejudice d mind; guided by common sense and by 
correct rules of law.” Commissioners of Civil Service v. Municipal Ct. of Boston,  359 Mass. 
211, 214 (1971); Cambridge v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 300, 304 (1997);  11 Selectmen of  Wakefield v. Judge of First Dist. Ct ., 262 Mass. 477, 482 (1928). The Commission 
determines justification for discipline by inquiring, “whether the employee has been guilty of 
substantial misconduct which adversely affects the public interest by impairing the efficiency of 
public ser vice.” School Comm. v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 486, 488 (1997); 
Murray v. Second Dist. Ct ., 389 Mass. 508, 514 (1983).  
The Appointing Authority’s burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence is 
satisfied “if it is made to appear more l ikely or probable in the sense that actual belief in its truth, 
derived from the evidence, exists in the mind or minds of the tribunal notwithstanding any 
doubts that may still linger there.” Tucker v. Pearlstein,  334 Mass. 33, 35 -36 (1956).   
Under sectio n 43, the Commission is required “to conduct a de novo hearing for the 
purpose of finding the facts anew .” Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 
(2006) and cases cited. However, “[t]he commission’s task  ... is not to be accomplished on a 
wholly blank slate. After making its de novo findings of fact, the commission does not act 
without regard to the previous decision of the [appointing authority], but rather decides whether 
‘there was reasonable justification for the action taken by the appoin ting authority in the 
circumstances found by the commission to have existed when the appointing authority made its 
decision’,” which may include an adverse inference against a complainant who fails to testify at 
the hearing before the appointing authority . Id., quoting internally from Watertown v. Arria , 16 
Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983) and cases cited.  
Also under section 43, the Commission has “considerable discretion” to affirm, vacate or 
modify discipline but that discretion is “not without bounds” and r equires sound explanation for 
doing so.  See, e.g . Police Comm’r v. Civil Service Comm’n , 39 Mass.App.Ct. 594, 600 
(1996)(“The power accorded to the commission to modify penalties must not be confused with  12 the power to impose penalties ab initio …accorded the appointing authority.”)   See also  Town of 
Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006), quoting Watertown v. Arria , 16 
Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983).   
It is the purview of the hearing officer to determine credibility of testimony presen ted to 
the Commission. “[T]he assessing of the credibility of witnesses is a preserve of the 
[Commission] upon which a court conducting judicial review treads with great reluctance.”  
Leominster v Stratton , 58 Mass.App.Ct. 726, 729 (2003); see Embers of Sa lisbury, Inc. v. 
Alcoholic Beverages Control Comm’n , 401 Mass. 526, 529 (1988); Doherty v. Retirement Bd. of 
Medford , 425 Mass. 130, 141 (1997).  See also  Covell v. Dep’t. of Social Services , 439 Mass. 
766, 787 (2003).  
Truthfulness is essential for a police officer.  To this end, the Commission  has noted, for 
example, that ,  
… [t]he criminal justice system relies on police officers to be truthful at all times and an 
appointing authority is justified in bypassing a candidate who does not meet this standard. 
See, e.g ., LaChance v. Erickson , 522 U.S. 262 (1998) (lying in a disciplinary 
investigation alone is grounds for termination); Meaney v. Woburn , 18 MCSR 129, 133 -
35 (discharge upheld for police officer based, in part, on officer's c onsistent dishonesty 
and “selective memory ” during departmental investigation of officer's misconduct); 
Pearson v. Whitman , 16 MCSR 46 (appointing authority ’s discharge of police officer 
who had a problem telling the truth upheld); Rizzo v. Town of Lexingt on, 21 MCSR 634 
(2008) (discharge upheld based partially on officer ’s dishonesty regarding a use of force 
incident); and Desharnias v. City of Westfield , 23 MCSR 418 (2009) (discharge upheld 
based primarily on officer ’s dishonesty about a relatively minor infraction that occurred 
on his shift).  
Wine v. City of Holyoke , 31 MCSR 19 (2018).  
Analysis  
 The Respondent has established by a preponderance of the evidence that it had just cause 
to discipline the Appellant.  In the spring of 2017, t he Appellant pleaded guilty to  permitting 
injury to one of her minor children by Mr. G in violation of G.L. c. 265, s. 13J(b)(third  13 paragraph) on January 12, 2017 , for which she was sentenced to two (2) years of probation .  
After investigations ( first by the State Poli ce regarding the criminal charges and the second by 
the RPD  to determine if the Appellant violated RPD rules), the Respondent conducted a 
disciplinary hearing under G.L. c. 31, s. 41.  The hearing officer issued a detailed report f inding 
that the Appellant  was untruthful when she falsely informed a mandated reporter at school that 
she was not aware that her son was injured and that his injuries occurred when he fell down the 
stairs and later made similar false statements to State Police investigators in vio lation of the RPD 
rule concerning truthfulness.  The hearing office r’s report also found that she was aware that Mr. 
G, a fellow RPD officer, committed a crime against one of her children and failed to report the 
crime to the Chief of Police  in violation o f the RPD ru le requiring officers to report such matters.  
The report found also found that on May 12, 2017, the Appellant pleaded guilty to permitting 
injury of a child under age 14 in violation of the RPD rule concerning criminal conduct by 
officers.  Fu rther, the report found that the Appellant’s actions in these regards constitute conduct 
unbecoming a police officer that discredits her and the Department in violation of the pertinent 
RPD rule.  This Appellant’s actions and/or inactions constitute substan tial misconduct which 
adversely affect the public interest by impairing the efficiency of public service .   
The question that follows is whether the Respondent had just cause to discipline the 
Appellant by terminat ing her employment. G.L. c. 31, s. 50 prov ides, in part,  
No person habitually using intoxicating liquors to excess shall be appointed to or 
employed or retained in any civil service position, nor shall any person be appointed to or 
employed in any such position within one year after his conviction  of any crime except 
that the appointing authority may, in its discretion , appoint or employ within such one -
year period a person convicted of any of the following offenses: a violation of any 
provision of chapter ninety relating to motor vehicles which co nstitutes a misdemeanor 
or, any other offense for which the sole punishment imposed  was (a) a fine of not more 
than one hundred dollars, (b) a sentence of imprisonment in a jail or house of correction 
for less than six months, with or without such fine, or (c) a sentence to any other penal  14 institution under which the actual time served w as less than six months, with or without 
such fine….  ( Id.)(emphasis added)  
 
This statute bars certain people from civil service employment  within a year after they have been 
convicted of certain crimes.  However, the statute further provides civil service employers the 
discretion to hire or retain such persons within the year of their conviction if their conviction was 
for certain misdemeanor s.  Since the Appellant pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor and was 
sentenced only to probation and one $50 fine, the Respondent could continue the Appellant’s 
employment if it so chose.  Here, the Respondent declined to exercise its discretion to retain the 
Appellant within the year following her conviction based on its findings the led to its termination 
of her employment  or thereafter . However, the Respondent also declined to continue her 
employment as a police officer because she is not authorized to have a  license to carry a gun.  To 
that end, the Respondent cites G.L. c. 140, s. 131(d)(i).  Subsection (d) states that certain people 
may apply for a license to carry firearms as long as they are not “prohibited persons”.  
Subsection (d)(i) defines a “prohibit ed person” as someone who,  
has, in a court of the commonwealth, been convicted … for the commission of (A) a 
felony; (B) a misdemeanor punishable  by imprisonment for more than 2 years; … 
(Id.)(emphasis added).  
 
Although the Appellant was sentenced  to two (2) years of probation for a misdemeanor, a 
conviction of the crime of permitting the injury of a child is punishable  for up to two and one -
half years  imprisonment .6  As a result, the Appellant is a prohibited person under the statute and 
she is un able to possess a license to carry a firearm.  The Respondent’s hearing officer’s report 
indicates  that, at the time, the Respondent employed two (2) officers “who are so disqualified 
                                                 
6 I take administrative notice that the Felony an d Misdemeanor Master Crime List by M.G.L. Reference, June 2018, 
issued by the Massachusetts Sentencing Commission, indicates that permitting injury to a child under age 14, 
pursuant to G.L. c. 265, s. 13J(b)(paragraph 3), with which the Respondent hearing officer indicated that the 
Appellant was charged, pertaining to “injury” to a child, constitutes a misdemeanor but that permitting “substantial 
injury”(paragraph 4) to a child under 14 constitutes a felony.  https://www.mass.gov/doc/master -crime -list/download  
(February 6, 2020).  There is no indication in the record that the Appellant was charged with permitting “substantial 
injury” to a child pursuant to paragraph 4 of the statute, which t he Master Crime List states is a felony.   15 due to convictions for operating under the influence of alcohol.”  (R.Ex . 1A)  A first or second 
offense OUI (G.L. c. 90, s. 24(1)(a)(1)) sentencing ceiling is two and a half years, like the 
Appellant’s conviction .7 However, the record here does not in clude sufficient information to 
determine whether the two (2) officers were so convicted , charged with untruthfulness,  and are 
prohibited persons, like the Appellant, barred from possessing a license to carry a firearm under 
G.L. c. 140, s. 131(d)(i).  Wh ile a police department may have the discretion to retain 
employment of officers who have been convicted of crimes and can no longer have a license to 
carry a firearm to perform the  functions of an officer, they should have objective reasons for 
such decis ions and equitably apply the m, assuming that t he officers are fit for duty.  This is not a 
case in which a police department has suspended an officer’s license to carry a firearm to 
discipline  an officer and bias or other i mproper motive may be of concern.   The Appellant’s 
conviction, under G.L. c. 31, s. 50, and her status as a “prohibited person” under G.L. c. 140, s. 
131(d)(i) , determine her fate .  The Respondent is not obliged to exercise its discretion to re store 
her to her position as police officer , without a firearms license, and a modification is not 
warranted.  I find no evidence of bad faith on the part of the Respondent in refusing to exercise 
its statutory discretion to retain the Appellant’s employment.  See Kraft v Police Commissioner 
of Boston , 417 Mass. 235 (1994)(In deciding whether a Police Commissioner violated a court 
order returning a police officer to duty, the standard was whether the Police Commissioner’s 
decision was made in a “good faith effort to fulfil his statutory manageria l function .”).    
Conclusion  
Accordingly, for the above stated reasons, the discipline appeal of M s. Halcovich, Docket 
No. D1-17-158, is hereby denied .   
                                                 
7 See Felony and Misdemeanor Master Crime List by M.G.L. Reference, June 2018, issued by the Mass. Sentencing 
Commission ( supra ).  16 Civil Service Commission  
 
/s/Cynthia A. Ittleman   
_______________________  
Cynthia A. Ittleman, Commissioner  
 
By vote of the Civil Service Commission (Bowman, Chairman; Camuso, Ittleman, Stein and 
Tivnan, Commissioners) on February 27, 2020.     
                            
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration within ten days of the rece ipt of the Commission’s decision.  
Under the pertinent provisions of the Code of Mass. Regulations, 801 CMR 1.01(7)(l), the motion must identify a 
clerical or mechanical error in the decision or a significant factor the Agency or the Presiding Officer may have 
overlooked in deciding the case. A motion for reconsideration shall be deemed a motion for rehearing in accordance 
with G.L. c. 30A, § 14(1) for the purpose of tolling the time for appeal.  
 
Under the provisions of G.L c. 31, § 44, any party aggrieved by a final decision or order of the Commission may 
initiate proceedings for judicial review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior court within thirty (30) days after 
receipt of such order or decision. Commencement of such proceeding shall not, unless spe cifically ordered by the 
court, operate as a stay of the Commission’s order or decision. After initiating proceedings for judicial review in 
Superior Court, the plaintiff, or his / her attorney, is required to serve a copy of the summons and complaint upon  
the Boston office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, with a copy to the Civil Service Commission, in 
the time and in the manner prescribed by Mass. R. Civ. P. 4(d).  
 
Notice to:  
Robert A. Boncore , Esq. (for Appellant)  
Matthew J. Buckley , Esq. (for Respondent)  
  