exoCo
COMMONWEALTH  OF MASSACHUSETTS
SUFFOLK,  SS. SUPERIOR  COURT
RECEIVED CIVIL ACTION  NO. 2016-01339-E
FEB -1 2018 BRENDA  JAMES
COMMONWEALTH  OF MASS VS.
CIVIL SERVICE  COMMISSION
CIVIL SERVICE  COMMISSION  and BOSTON  POLICE  DEPARTMENT
ORDER  ON PARTIES’  CROSS-MOTIONS  FOR JUDGMENT  ON THE PLEADINGS
In this action, plaintiff  Brenda  James (“plaintiff”),  a former  Boston  police officer,  seeks
judicial  review  pursuant  to G. L. c, 30A, § 14 of a decision  of defendant  Civil Service
Commission  (“CSC”)  upholding  her termination  by the appointing  authority,  defendant  Boston
Police Department  (“BPD”). Both parties have moved for judgment  on the pleadings  under
Mass, R. Civ. P. 12(c) and Superior Court Standing Order 1-96, After hearing, and for the
reasons set forth below, the matter is REMANDED  to the CSC for further hearing.
The BPD terminated  the plaintiff  for violation  of various  BPD rules and regulations,  viz.,
filing a police report containing  multiple  false statements,  including  false allegations  against  her
superior  officer, Captain  Paul Russell (Capt. Russell”);  filing false allegations  of indecent
1 assault against Capt. Russell with the BPD’s Internal Affairs Division  (“IAD”);  seeking criminal
“ee 7» charges against Capt. Russell based on false allegations;  and testifying  untruthfully  under oath at
Os 11, 2015, before Hearing Officer Cynthia A. tttleman (“Hearing  Officer”), a CSC Commissioner,a District Court Clerk- Magistrate?  s hearing on her application  for a criminal complaint  against
ie Capt. Russell. After hearings. held over three days, June 15, 2015; June 18, 2015; and September
AY, he CSC voted to deny the plaintiffs  appeal of her termination,  finding that the BPD had
established  just cause for the plaintiffs  termination  for filing false reports against  Capt. Russell,
seeking  a criminal  complaint  against  him for which a Clerk-Magistrate  found there was no
probable  cause, failing  to appear for an annual BPD hair drug test, and failing  to report her
change  of address  as required  by BPD regulations.
The plaintiff  attended  the first and second  days of the hearing  but did not attend the third
day, September  11, 2015, on which date she was scheduled  to testify. On August 17, 2015, the
plaintiff  had presented  the Hearing  Officer  with a letter explaining  that her daughter  was
undergoing  treatment  for an “aggressive,  very invasive”  condition  [cancer]  that required  “intense,
immediate  care.” The plaintiff  also provided  the CSC with two letters,  which appear on pages
116 and 117 of the Administrative  Record,  that offered  reasons  for her inability  to attend the final
hearing  date. One letter, dated September  3, 2015 (eight days before the final hearing  on
September  11th), from Cyllene Saintelien,  PMHNP-BC',  stated that the plaintiff “is a patient of
NOVA  Psychiatric  Services  and was last seen on 09/03/2015"  and that she “is currently  dealing
with a stressful  family situation,”  ie., her “only daughter  has an acute medical  condition  and is
currently  under critical care.” The second  letter, dated August 18, 2015, was from Soraya
Rendon,  Administrative  Coordinator  to Kevin Emerick,  M.D. (“Dr. Emerick”),  at the
Massachusetts  Eye and Ear Infirmary;  it said that the plaintiff's  daughter  was under Dr.
Emerick’s  care and that, “[d]ue to the nature of [the daughter’s]  illness, [the plaintiff]  will need
to take several  weeks off work to care for her daughter.”
When the plaintiff  failed to show on the third day of the hearing,  September  11, 2015, the
BPD moved  to dismiss  her appeal pursuant  to the CSC hearing  notice that stated that the failure
to appear may result in dismissal  of the appeal. Although  the Hearing  Officer  denied  the motion,
'Psychiatric-Mental  Health Nurse Practitioner-Board  Certified.
2
it appears  that she drew an adverse  inference  against  the plaintiff  for her non-appearance.  Over
the objection  of the BPD, the plaintiff's  attorney  was permitted  to admit into the record a
transcript  of the plaintiff's  testimony  at the BPD disciplinary  hearing  on the charges  against  her.
The Hearing  Officer  indicated  that the admission  of the transcript  would not constitute  an
appearance  and that she would give it “the weight  that it is due.”
The court is troubled  that the plaintiff  was not granted  a continuance  in light of her
daughter’s  documented  health crisis. The CSC’s decision  turned in major part on the
assessments  of credibility  of the parties involved  in the charges against  the plaintiff. The court is
not unmindful  of the fact that the plaintiffs  version  of the salient events here was discredited  by
no fewer than six individuals  or entities (the IAD, Clerk-Magistrate,  Deputy  Superintendent
Colm Lydon,  Police Commissioner  Paul Evans, the arbitrator,  and the CSC). Nevertheless,  the
plaintiff  appears  to have had good cause for her failure  to appear  to testify; and her absence
should not have been held against  her.
ORDER
For all the foregoing  reasons,  it is hereby  ORDERED  that this matter  be REMANDED
to the CSC for the sole purpose of taking the plaintiff's  testimony  and possibly  reconsidering  its
decision  in light thereof.
Linda E, Giles,
Justice  of the Superior  Court
Dated: December  22, 2017
