1      COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
 
SUFFOLK, SS.               CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
 
              One Ashburton Place:  Room 503  
              Boston, MA 02108  
              (617) 727 -2293  
 
RICHARD LaBELLE ,  
  Appellant  
   v. 
                                                            D-18-024 
                                                                                                         
SPRINGFIELD POLICE  DEPARTMENT ,  
  Respondent                                                                               
      
 
Appearance for Appellant:      Austin M. Joyce , Esq.  
            Reardon, Joyce & Akerson, P.C.  
            4 Lancaster Terrace  
            Worcester , MA   01609  
              
Appearance for Respondent:      Maurice M. Cahillane , Esq.  
            City of Springfield  
            36 Court Street, Room 05  
            Springfield , MA 0 1103  
    
Commissioner:         Christopher C. Bowman  
 
DECISION  
On February 9, 2018 , the Appellant, Richard LaBelle  (Captain  LaBelle ), pursuant to 
the provisions  of G.L. c. 31, § 43, filed an appeal with the Civil Service Commission 
(Commission), contesting the decision of the Respondent, the City of Springfield  (City) ’s 
Police Department  to suspend him for one (1) day from  his position as Police Captain for 
viola ting Department Rules related to Respectful Treatment of the General Public. On 
March 28, 2018 , I held a pre-hearing  conference  at the Springfield State Building in 2 Springfield, MA.  I held a full hearing at the same location on June 13, 2018 .1  As no 
written notice was received from either  party, the hearing was declared private.  A CD 
was made of the hearing.2     
FINDINGS OF FACT :  
Thirteen (1 3) Exhibits were entered into evidence.  Based upon these exhibits, 
stipulated facts,  and the testimony of : 
Called  by the Springfield  Police  Department : 
 
 Commissioner John Barbieri, Springfield Police Department3;  
 Sgt. Monique McCoy, Springfield Police Department ;  
 C.S., civilian , Springfield, MA ; 
 
Called by Captain LaBelle : 
  
 Richard LaBelle , Appellant;     
 
and tak ing administrative notice of all matters filed in the case, pertinent statutes, 
regulations, policies, stipulations and reasonable inferences from the credible evidence, a 
preponderance of the evidence establishes the following:  
1. The City of Springfie ld doe s not have a Social Media Policy  that is applicable to 
members of the Police Department . (Testimony of Commissioner Barbieri ) 
2. The Department does have Rules and Regulations applicable to all members of the 
Department . (Testimony of Commissioner Barbieri ) 
3. Rule 29 provides , in part :  “RESPECTFUL TREATMENT:  Employees shall, on all 
occasions, be civil and respectful, courteous and considerate toward their supervisors, 
their subordinates, and all other members of the Department and the general public.  
                                                 
1 The Standard Adjudicatory rules of Practice and Procedures, 810 CMR §§ 1.00, et seq ., apply to 
adjudications before the Commission, with G.L. Chapter 31, or any Commission rules, taking precedence.  
2 If there is a judicial appeal of this decision, the plainti ff becomes obligated to use the copy of the CD 
provided to the parties to supply the court with the written transcript of the hearing to the extent that he/she 
wishes to challenge the decision as unsupported by the substantial evidence, arbitrary and capri cious, or an 
abuse of discretion.  
3 Commissioner Barbieri has subsequently retired from the Springfield Police Department.  3 No emplo yee shall use epithets or terms that tend to denigrate  a particular race or 
ethnic group except when necessary in police reports or testimony. ” (Exhibit #13 ) 
 
4. Captain LaBelle  has been employed by the Springfield Police Department  for 
approximately twenty -one (21) years and has been a Captain  since 2017 . (Testimony 
of Captain  LaBelle ) 
5. There was no prior discipline of Captain LaBelle.  (Stipulation of the parties)  
6. Captain LaBelle had a Facebook account on the date of the incident, September 25, 
2017 . (Testimo ny of Captain LaBelle ) 
7.  The profile for the account indicated that Captain LaBelle “Works at City of 
Springfield, MA” , but did not indicate that he was a police officer.  (Exhibit #11, 
Testimony of Captain LaBelle ) 
8. MassLive is a media outlet in the Springfi eld area with  a newspaper,  a website and a 
Facebook page where it publishes news articles . (Testimony of C.S. and Captain 
LaBelle )   
9. On the morning of September 25, 2017, MassLive published an article concerning 
New England Patriots players  and the team ow ner kneeling during the national 
anthem  before the game . (Testimony of  C.S.) 
10. In the comments section  of the article, J.S. posted a cartoon on the MassLive 
Facebook page .  The cartoon depicted a white man wearing a white T -shirt with an 
American flag logo  saying, “That’s offensive!” as he point s at a uniformed, kneeling 
football player meant to be Colin Kaepernick, while the man’s back is to an unarmed 
black man (as written on his shirt) sprawled face down with blood pooling around 
him.  (Exhibit #11 ) 4 11. C.S. s aw the cartoon post on Facebook early that morning before she went to work   
and she added  her own post  to the comments , “EXACTLY!!!” . (Exhibit #11, 
Testimony of C.S. ) 
12. Captain LaBelle also saw the cartoon post in the comments section of the Patriots 
article  on Facebook  that morning .  At the time, Captain LaBelle was off -duty and at 
home.  Captain LaBelle posted a reply  that said, “Exactly, shows the world what a 
lying bigot you are.”  (Exhibit #11, Testimony of Captain LaBelle ) 
13. After Captain LaBelle posted his comment  on the MassLive Facebook page, C.S. got 
an anonymous call telling her that Richard  LaBelle was a police officer  who was high 
up in the Springfield Police D epartment  and that she should be careful . (Testimony of 
C.S.) 
14. After the call, C.S.  again po sted to the Facebook page, “officer …..I’m not sure who 
you’re calling a lying bigot but try and understand why these players are silently 
protesting, just think about it.”  (Exhibit #11) 
15. Captain Labelle’s next post to the Facebook page said, “They are pushi ng their 
dishonest hateful political agenda by slandering other Americans … you’re the one 
who needs to do some thinking.”  (Exhibit #11 ) 
16. J.S. then commented , “Richard thank you. I see we are in agreement about Trump and 
his sheep.”  (Exhibit #11 ) 
17. There were  also other posts to the comments section  added by other individuals 
throughout the back -and-forth  listed here , but they do not have a bearing on the 
exchange among J.S., C.S. and Captain LaBelle . (Exhibit #11)  5 18. C.S. added another post, saying, “ Richard I h ave informed the municipality you work 
for since you have violated their social media policy by spreading slander .” (Exhibit 
#11) 
19. Captain LaBelle  then posted , “Got it [C.S.]  you’re a liar and morally reprehensible .” 
(Exhibit #11, Testimony of Captain LaBel le) 
20. He then added another post directed to J.S., “Childish response but not surprising 
from someone who couldn’t keep a job bagging groceries. …lol sheep, you are the 
one out to pasture .” (Exhibit #11) 
21. Captain LaBelle indicated that “bagging groceries” was  a reference to J.S.’s 
Facebook profile listing him as a former service clerk . (Testimony of Captain 
LaBelle ) 
22. Later that afternoon during her break at work , C.S. called  the Police Department’s 
Internal Investigation Unit to complain about Captain LaBelle’s  Facebook posts . 
(Testimony of Sgt. McCoy, Exhibit #6 ) 
23. After talking to C.S., Sgt. McCoy printed  copies of the Facebook posts and forwarded 
them along with her report to then-Commissioner Barbieri , who was the Appointing 
Authority .  (Exhibit #6, Testimony of Commissioner Barbieri and  Sgt. McCoy)  
24. According to the department’s procedures, Commissioner Barbieri assigned the 
complaint to then-Deputy Chief Cheryl Clapprood  on September 27, 2017,  for 
investigation.  (Testimony of Commissioner Barbieri, Exhibit #1 ) 
25. As part of her investigation, then-Deputy Chief Clapprood spoke to C.S., and she had 
Captain Labelle submit a report concerning his postings.  (Exhibit #4 , Testimony of 
C.S.) 6 26. On October 10, 2017, then-Deputy Chief Clapprood concluded her investigation wi th 
a report to the Commissioner that recommended no further action.   She found no 
violation of any rules or regulations of the department because Captain LaBelle did 
not use or infer his status as a police supervisor in his posts.   She did not find that 
Captain LaBelle use d his position, status or employment, nor did he threaten or try to 
intimidate anyone by his posts.   (Exhibit #4)  
27. The next step in the complaint process was review by the Community Police Hearing 
Board  made up of civilians , which was estab lished by the Mayor and the Law 
Department.  (Testimony of Commissioner Barbieri)  
28. On November 8, 2017, two members of the Community Police Hearing Board did 
that review of  the investigation , and they recommended the issuance of a charge letter 
and a hearin g before the  full Board to get more information .  (Exhibit #2)  
29. On November 9, 2017, then-Deputy Chief Clapprood reiterated that she did not find 
any violation by Captain LaBelle of the department ’s rules or regulations but  
acquiesced to the hearing request .  (Exhibit #3)  
30. On the same date, then-Commissioner Barbieri  forwarded the complaint on for a 
hearing before the Community Police Hearing Board.  (Exhibit #3)  
31. On November 10, 2017, Sgt. McCoy  received additional information from C.S., and 
she filed a suppl emental report containing the last two Facebook posts made by 
Captain LaBelle after C.S. advised him that she was filing a complaint.  (Exhibit #7, 
Testimony of Sgt. McCoy)  
32. On November 14, 2017, the Commissioner issued a Notice of Inter -Departmental 
Charge s to Captain LaBelle , containing five charges .  (Exhibit #8)  7 33. On January 24, 2018, the Community Police Hearing Board held a hearing on the 
charges and sustained only the charge under Rule 29 (Respectful Treatment ) by a 
vote of three to two.  (Exhibit #9, # 10) 
34. Based upon the finding of the Community Police Hearing Board and the 
recommendation of the City’s Labor Relations attorney , Commissioner Barbieri 
suspended Captain Labelle for one -day without pay by a notice dated January 30, 
2018, received by Captain LaBelle on February 1, 2018.   The notice specified that the 
suspension was for posting comments on Facebook that a citizen took as offensive.   
(Testimony of Commissioner Barbieri, Exhibit #13)  
35. In his testimony, Commissioner Barbieri  stated that  he based hi s decision on the 
postings made by Captain LaBelle after C.S. identified him as “officer”  because of 
their content and manner, agreeing with the position that they were disrespectful and 
derogatory.  (Testimony of Commissioner Barbieri)  
Legal Standard  
 G.L. c. 31, § 43 provides:  
 
 “If the commission by a preponderance of the evidence determines that there was 
just cause for an action taken against such person it shall affirm the action of the 
appointing  authority, otherwise it shall reverse such action and  the person concerned 
shall be  returned to his position without loss of compensation or other rights; 
provided, however, if the employee by a preponderance of evidence, establishes that 
said action was based  upon harmful error in the application of the ap pointing 
authority’s procedure, an error of law, or upon any factor or conduct on the part of the 
employee not reasonably related to  the fitness of the employee to perform in his 
position, said action shall not be sustained, and the person shall be returne d to his 
position without loss of compensation or other  rights. The commission may also 
modify any penalty imposed by the appointing authority.”  
 
     An action is “justified” if it is “done upon adequate reasons sufficiently supported by 
credible  evidence , when weighed by an unprejudiced mind; guided by common sense and 8 by correct rules of law ;” Commissioners of Civil Service v. Municipal Ct. of Boston , 359 
Mass. 211, 214 (1971); Cambridge v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 300, 304 
(1997); Selectmen  of Wakefield v. Judge of First Dist. Ct. , 262 Mass. 477, 482 (1928). 
The Commission determines justification for discipline by inquiring, “whether the 
employee has been guilty of substantial misconduct which adversely affects the public 
interest by impair ing the efficiency of public service ;” School Comm. v. Civil Service 
Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 486, 488 (1997); Murray v. Second Dist. Ct. , 389 Mass. 508, 
514 (1983).  
Analysis  
     In their post -hearing briefs, both parties have cited relevant federal court decisions 
regarding the balance between a government employee’s First Amendment rights and the 
interests of a government employer in promoting the efficiency of the public services it 
performs through its employees.  I have carefully reviewed those argumen ts.  
      I agree with Captain LaBelle that the underlying topic related to these online postings 
was a matter of public concern; that he made the postings while he was off -duty; and that 
he did not use Department resources (i.e. – a Department computer) to make these 
postings, all of which, from the outset, tip the balance toward the First Amendment rights 
afforded to Captain LaBelle.  
     It is undisputed, however, that, at the mid -point of their online conversation, Captain 
Labelle knew that C.S. was aw are of his position as a police officer for the Springfield 
Police Department.  I gave the most weight to the postings made from this point forward, 
including Captain LaBelle’s posting to C.S. stating:   “Got it [C.S.] you’re a liar and 
morally reprehensib le” and his posting to J.S. stating:  “Childish response but not 9 surprising from someone who couldn’t keep a job bagging groceries . …lol sheep, you are 
the one out to pasture.”  (emphasis added)  
    The fact that the underlying topic here was a matter of pu blic concern did not 
give Captain LaBelle, a superior officer in the Springfield Police Department, free 
reign to call a citizen “morally reprehensible” or to tell another citizen (J.S.) (who 
has a Spanish surname) that he “couldn’t keep a job bagging groc eries”, even 
when viewed in the context of Captain LaBelle’s First Amendment rights and the 
recognition that discourse on matters of public concern can sometimes be caustic.   
     The Department has a right to expect that its police officers, particularly  those 
who hold the position of Captain, treat all citizens with respect and courtesy   -- 
and the Department’s Rules explicitly require it.  Captain LaBelle violated that 
rule and the City’s decision to implement a short, one -day suspension to correct 
his boorish behavior did not violate Captain LaBelle’s First Amendment rights.  
Conclusion  
     For all of the above reasons, Captain LaBelle’s appeal under Docket No. D -18-
024 is denied .  
Civil Service Commission  
 
/s/ Christopher Bowman  
Christopher C. Bowman  
Chairman  
 
By a 4-1 vote of the Civil Service Commission (Bowman, Chairman; Camuso, Ittleman, 
Stein , Commissioners  [Tivnan – No]4) on April 11, 2019 .  
 
 
 
                                                 
4 Commissioner Tivnan voted no as he believes that, based on the facts presented, including the lack of 
prior discipline, that a written warning, as opposed to a one -day suspension, is warrante d here.  10  
 
 
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration within ten days of the receipt of this Commission order 
or decision. Under the pertinent provisions of the Code of Mass. Regulations, 801 CMR 1.01(7)(l), the 
motion must identify a clerical or mechanical error in this order or decision or a significant factor the 
Agency or the Presiding Officer may have overlook ed in deciding the case.  A motion for reconsideration 
does not  toll the statutorily prescribed thirty -day time limit for seeking judicial review of this Commission 
order or decision.  
 
Under the provisions of G.L c. 31, § 44, any party aggrieved by this Co mmission order or decision may 
initiate proceedings for judicial review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior court within thirty (30) days 
after receipt of this order or decision. Commencement of such proceeding shall not, unless specifically 
ordered by  the court, operate as a stay of this Commission order or decision.  After initiating proceedings 
for judicial review in Superior Court, the plaintiff, or his / her attorney, is required to serve a copy of the 
summons and complaint upon the Boston office o f the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, with a 
copy to the Civil Service Commission, in the time and in the manner prescribed by Mass. R. Civ. P. 4(d)  
 
Notice to:  
Austin M. Joyce , Esq. (for Appellant)  
Maurice M. Cahillane , Esq. (for Respondent)  