NOTICE: Summary decisions  issued by the Appeals Court pursuant  to its rule 1:28, as
amended by 73 Mass. App. Ct. 1001 (2009), are primarily  directed  to the parties and,
therefore,  may not fully address the facts of the case or the panel's decisional
rationale. Moreover, such decisions are not circulated  to the entire court and,
therefore,  represent  only the views of ‘the panel that decided the case. A summary
decision pursuant to rule 1:28 issued after February 25, 2008, may be cited for its
persuasive  value but, because of the limitations  noted above, not as binding precedent.
See Chace v. Curran, 71 Mass. App. Ct. 258, 260 n.4 (2008).
COMMONWEALTH  OF MASSACHUSETTS
APPEALS  COURT
16-P-747
WILLIAM  LEEMAN & another!”  7° Sr
CITY OF HAVERHILL  & another.? iss
MEMORANDUM  AND ORDER PURSUANT  TO RULE 1:28
The plaintiffs,  William  Leeman and Christopher  Pagliuca,
are police officers  employed  by the Haverhill  police department.
They appeal from a Superior  Court judgment  that affirmed  a
decision  of the Civil Service Commission  (commission)  upholding
a ten-day  suspension  of Leeman and a five-day  suspension  of
Pagliuca  imposed  by the city of Haverhill. The suspensions
arose from the plaintiffs'  failure  to fully report and to
investigate  an incident  involving  a retired  lieutenant  colonel
of the Massachusetts  State police who had stopped  his vehicle
after allegedly  driving  while intoxicated  and crashing  into a
utility  pole, causing  extensive  damage. We affirm for
substantially  the reasons set forth in the judge's  well-reasoned
1 Christopher  Pagliuca.
2 Civil Service  Commission.
memorandum  of decision  and order on the parties' cross motions
for judgment  on the pleadings.
Background.  After a two-day  evidentiary  hearing, at which
Leeman and Pagliuca  testified,  the commission  found the
following  facts. On March 30, 2012, Pagliuca  was one of four
police officers who responded  to a reported incident of
operation  of a motor vehicle  while intoxicated.  The driver of
the vehicle  was Charles  Noyes. The investigation  revealed  that
Noyes had knocked  down a utility  pole in West Newbury  and then
continued  to drive into Haverhill  where he eventually  stopped  on
the side of the road. Following  the incident,  Pagliuca  wrote a
report that was reviewed  and approved  by Leeman. The report
contained  numerous  omissions,  including:  Noyes's statements  to
paramedics  that he had been drinking;  Noyes's statements  that he
should be let go because he was a retired State trooper; the
fact that Noyes actually  was a retired  State trooper;  and that
all of the officers at the scene, including  Pagliuca, believed
Noyes was intoxicated.
The police chief of the Haverhill  police department,  Alan
DeNaro, reviewed  Pagliuca's  report and determined  that it was
incomplete  and "appeared  to be purposely  designed  to avoid
supporting  that there was sufficient  probable  cause at the scene
to make an arrest." DeNaro ordered  an internal  investigation,
after which Leeman was suspended  for ten days and Pagliuca  was
suspended  for five days, for violations  of Haverhill  police
department  rule 130 ("Reports  submitted  . . . shall be truthful
and complete"),  rule 111 ("Officers  shall perform  their duties
in a manner that will maintain  the highest standards  of
efficiency"),  and canons of police ethics art. X ("[Law
enforcement  officers]  shall ascertain  what constitutes  evidence
and shall present  such evidence  impartially").
The plaintiffs  appealed  their suspensions  to the
commission.  On July 11, 2013, the commission  issued a unanimous
decision  upholding  the suspensions.  As regards Pagliuca,  the
commission  found that he ignored  evidence  that Noyes was
intoxicated,  did not administer  a field sobriety  or breathalyzer
test, failed to adequately  search for Noyes's car keys, and
wrote an untruthful  and incomplete  report. The commission  found
that Leeman, as shift commander,  failed to ensure that
Pagliuca's  report was truthful  and accurate  and discouraged  a
subordinate  officer from correcting  the report. In so doing,
the commission  considered  comparative  discipline  and noted that
there was no evidence  of bias or disparate  treatment. The
plaintiffs  then filed a complaint  for judicial  review in the
Superior  Court. The parties filed cross motions for judgment  on
the pleadings  and, after a hearing, the judge denied the
plaintiffs'  motion and allowed  the defendants’  motion.
Discussion.  Under G. L. c. 31, § 44, we review the
commission's  decision  "to determine  if it violates  any of the
standards  set forth in G. L. ec. 30A, § 14(7)." Plymouth  v.
Civil Serv. Commn., 426 Mass. 1, 5 (1997). The judge found, and
we agree, that the plaintiffs  waived their arguments  that the
commission  decision  was not supported  by substantial  evidence,
was arbitrary  or capricious,  or was an abuse of discretion
because they failed to submit a transcript  of the commission
hearing in the Superior  Court. See Superior  Court Standing
Order 1-96. We are therefore  bound by the commission's  factual
findings,  and our review is limited  only to determining  whether
there was an error of law. See Covell v. Department  of Social
Servs., 439 Mass. 766, 782-783 (2003). See also Connolly  v.
Suffolk  County Sheriff's  Dept., 62 Mass. App. Ct. 187, 193
(2004).
The plaintiffs  first argue that they should not have been
suspended  because  the facts known to Pagliuca,  and subsequently
transmitted  to Leeman, were insufficient  to support  probable
cause to arrest Noyes for operating  while under the influence  or
to support  Haverhill's  jurisdiction  to make an arrest. Even if
we were to assume that these arguments  had merit (which we do
not), they are irrelevant  because  the plaintiffs  were not
suspended  for failing  to arrest Noyes; rather, they were
suspended  because  Pagliuca  wrote an inaccurate  and incomplete
report that Leeman subsequently  reviewed  and approved.
Next, the plaintiffs  argue that the commission  decision  was
arbitrary  and capricious  because  it upheld greater  discipline  in
this case than it did in a 2011 incident  involving  another
Haverhill  police officer. Contrary  to the plaintiffs’  claim, it
is clear that the commission  concluded  that the 2011 case was
not comparative  because  it did not involve  the submission  of an
inaccurate  and incomplete  report or a commanding  officer's
direction  to a subordinate  not to correct  the report. Because
"there is no indication  that any evidence  was arbitrarily
discounted,  the decision  cannot be considered  arbitrary  or
Capricious"  (emphasis  supplied). Selectmen  of Natick v. Labor
Relations  Commn., 16 Mass. App. Ct. 972, 973 (1983).
Haverhill  has requested  appellate  attorney's  fees. We
conclude  that an award of fees is appropriate.  Counsel for
Haverhill  may submit a petition  for appellate  attorney's  fees,
with supporting  materials,  within fourteen  days of the date of
the rescript;  the plaintiffs  shall have fourteen  days thereafter
to respond.
Entered:See Fabre v.
June 20,2017.441 Mass. 9, 10-11 (2004).
Judgment  affirmed.
By the Court (Vuono, Meade &
Maldonado,  JJ,3),
Dosayeh & > Lanter
A
Clerk
3 The panelists  are listed in order of seniority.
