1 
   COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACH USETTS  
                               CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
       One Ashburton Place:  Room 503  
       Boston, MA 02108  
       (617) 727 -2293  
 
 
 
   
Case No.:  D1-12-228 
        
 
 
 
 
 
  
DECISION  AFTER REMAND  
 
On May 1, 2014, th e Civil Service Commission voted to affirm and adopt the Tentative 
Decision of the Magistrate in whole, making that Tentative Decision the Final Decision of the 
Commission.  The decision of the Town of Middleboro ugh (Town) to terminate the Appellant 
was af firmed and the Appellant’s appeal was denied.  
 
On September 21, 2015, the decision was remanded to the Commission by the Superior Court 
“for the limited purpose of considering the validity of [an] August 6, 2010 Last Chance 
Agreement and whether [the Appel lant]’s conduct constitutes just cause for termination 
independent of the Agreement.”   The Commission referred the matter back to the Magistrate.  
 
On December 19, 2018, pursuant to 801 CMR 1.01 (11) (c), the Magistrate issued the 
attached Tentative Decisio n After Remand  to the Commission.  The parties had thirty (30) 
days to provide written objections to the Commission .  The Appellant submitted written 
objections to the Tentative Decision  After Remand  and the Respondent submitted a response 
to the Appellant ’s objections.   
 
After careful review and consideration, t he Commission  voted  to affirm and adopt the 
Tentative  Decision  After Remand  of the Magistrate  in whole, thus making this the Final 
Decision of the Commission.  
 
The decision of the  Town of Middlebor ough to terminate Mr. Levesque as a police officer is 
affirmed and Mr. Levesque’s appeal under Docket No. D1-12-228 is hereby denied .   
 
By vote of the Civil Service Commission ( Bowman, Chairman; Camuso, Ittleman , Stein  and 
Tivnan , Commissioners ) on March 14, 2019.    
 
Civil Service Commission  
 
/s/ Christopher Bowman  
Christopher C. Bowman  
Chairman  ADAM LEVESQUE , 
 Appellant  
 
  v. 
 
 
TOWN OF 
MIDDLEBORO UGH  
 Respondent  2 
                                                                            
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration within ten days of the receipt of thi s Commission order or 
decision. Under the pertinent provisions of the Code of Mass. Regulations, 801 CMR 1.01(7)(l), the motion must 
identify a clerical or mechanical error in this order or decision or a significant factor the Agency or the Presiding 
Offic er may have overlooked in deciding the case .  A motion for reconsideration does not  toll the statutorily 
prescribed thirty -day time limit for seeking judicial review of this Commission order or decision.  
 
Under the provisions of G.L c. 31, § 44, any party aggrieved by this Commission order or decision may initiate 
proceedings for judicial review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior court within thirty (30) days after receipt 
of this order or decision. Commencement of such proceeding shall not, unless spe cifically ordered by the court, 
operate as a stay of this Commission order or decision.   
 
Notice to:  
Timothy G. Kenneally, Esq. (for Appellant)  
Leo J. Peloquin, Esq. (for Respondent)  
Joshua R. Coleman, Esq. (for Respondent)  
Edward McGrath , Esq. (Chief Adm inistrative Magistrate, DALA)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
  
 
 
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
 
SUFFOLK, ss .     Division of Administrative Law Appeals  
      One Congress Street, 11th Floor  
      Boston, MA 02114  
      (617) 626 -7200  
      Fax:  (617) 626 -7220  
       www.mass.gov/dala  
      Docket Nos.:   D1-12-228, CS -12-667 
        
ADAM LEVESQUE,  
 Appellant  
 
v. 
 
TOWN OF MIDDLEBOROUGH,  
  Respondent  
 
Appearance for the Appellant:  
 
Timothy G. Kenneally, Esq.  
Foley and Foley, P.C.  
350 Gifford Stree t, Suite 26  
Falmouth, MA 02540   
      
Appearance for the Respondent:  
  
Leo J. Peloquin, Esq.  
Joshua R. Coleman, Esq.  
Collins, Loughran and Peloquin, P.C.  
220 Norwood Park South, Suite 1D  
Norwood, MA 02062  
         
Administrative Magistrate:  
 
 Angela McConn ey Scheepers, Esq.  
 
                                  
SUMMARY OF TENTATIVE DECISION UPON REMAND  
 
  The Appellant’s conduct warranted termination independently of the valid last chance 
agreement. After the Middleborough Police Department opened an investiga tion into the 
Appellant’s filing of inaccurate grant activity reports, he contacted a witness in direct 
violation of the police chief’s order and gained information to assist him in his Section 41 
hearing. I therefore recommend that the Civil Service Commi ssion dismiss the appeal.  
 
 
 4 
 TENTATIVE DECISION UPON REMAND  
 
On September 21, 2015, this matter was remanded by the Plymouth Superior Court, 
(Chin, J.) to the Civil Service Commission (Commission) for the limited purpose of 
considering the validity of the August 6, 2010 Last Chance Agreement (LCA or Agreement) 
and whether the Appellant’s conduct constituted just cause for the termination independent of 
the Agreement. Levesque v. Massachusetts Civil Serv. Comm’n , Docket No. CV -00548 -A 
(Plymouth Sup. Ct., Sep t. 21, 2015).  
On October 2, 2015, the Commission issued an Order after Remand, further 
remanding the matter to the DALA magistrate in order to (1) further conduct proceedings to 
address the issues raised by the Court; and (2) issue a revised Tentative Deci sion to the 
Commission with the customary comment period afforded to both parties prior to a 
Commission vote.  
The Appellant requested a rehearing. Pursuant to the Commission’s October 2, 2015 
Order, on October 28, 2015, I ordered the parties to submit bri efs by November 30, 2015 on 
the remanded issues of the Agreement’s validity and the whether the Appellant’s actions 
warranted termination independent of the Agreement. In the DALA order, I stated that I 
would not hold further hearings unless either party c ould specify what the proposed new 
testimony would offer and why it could not have been proffered during the three -day 
Commission hearing.   
The Superior Court is clear that this matter was remanded for the limited purpose of 
determining the validity of th e Agreement and whether the Appellant’s conduct warranted 
termination independent of the Agreement. I held a hearing limited to these issues at the 
Division of Administrative Law Appeals on April 5 and 6, 2017. The hearing was conducted 
according to the fo rmal rules of the Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure. 
801 C.M.R § 1.01.  The witnesses were sequestered. The stenographic record serves as the 5 
 official record of the hearing upon remand.  
Respondent Town of Middleborough (Town) objected to  the remand hearing and the 
Appellant’s proffered exhibits. The Town posited that a critical witness to the validity of the 
Agreement was Michael Hanley, Esq., who served as counsel for the New England Police 
Benevolent Association, Inc. (NEPBA), Local 76,  Middleborough Police Officers (Union). 
Mr. Hanley represented the Appellant/Union in the Agreement, the matter of Mr. Levesque’s 
dismissal, and filed the civil service appeal on Mr. Levesque’s behalf. (Exhibit 38.) The first 
civil service hearing was cond ucted on November 27, 2012, January 31, 2013 and February 6, 
2013. Mr. Hanley passed away later in the year on September 30, 2013.1 The Town posited 
that Attorney Hanley had successfully saved Mr. Levesque’s position by negotiating the 
Agreement.   
The App ellant submitted six additional exhibits, disciplinary records of patrolmen in 
the Middleborough Police Department (Department) (Exhibits 40 -44).2 I had precluded some 
of those disciplinary records in the earlier hearing because I did not think they were r elevant. I 
admit them now to illustrate the factual distinction between the conduct of Mr. Levesque and 
the other police officers who were disciplined.  
The Town submitted 30 additional exhibits (Exhibits 45 -74). The documents related to 
the Department’s in vestigation before the matter was resolved by the Agreement; negotiation 
of the Agreement; and the Appellant’s proceeding before the Department of Labor Relations 
charging that Mr. Hanley had breached his duty of fair representation in a) the negotiation a nd 
                                                           
1  Exhibit 72.  
2  Exhibit 40. 2012 investigation and discipline file of Patrolman  Angelo Joseph 
LaPanna, III;  
 Exhibit 40A. Patrolman LaPan na’s May 17, 2012 Traffic Enforcement Grant Activity 
Report;  
Exhibit 41. March 17, 2009 Decision of Sergeant R.;  
Exhibit 42. March 26, 2010 Letter of Reprimand issued to Patrolman BC;  
Exhibit 43. June 22, 2011 report of one -day suspension issued to Patrolm an KD; and  6 
 agreement leading to the LCA and b) the matter leading to the Appellant’s 2012 dismissal. 
The Appellant objected to Exhibits 69, 70 and 71, regarding his Department of Labor 
Relations appeal and the Union’s representation of his matter during the negoti ation of the 
LCA and his later dismissal.3 This appeal was concurrent with the dates of the first hearing of 
this civil service matter. I admitted the exhibits.  
The Town called Patrolman Angelo Joseph LaPanna, III, Lieutenant David Michael 
Mankiewicz and r etired Chief Bruce Gates. I had precluded Officer LaPanna’s testimony as 
an Appellant’s witness in the first hearing.   
I marked the Appellant’s Remand Brief as Exhibit “C” and marked the Respondent’s 
Remand Brief as Exhibit “D.” I marked the Appellant’s R emand Brief as Exhibit “E” and 
marked the Respondent’s Remand Brief as Exhibit “F.”  
I incorporate by reference my original findings, Findings of Fact 1 – 51, as set forth in  
my decision dated May 1, 2014, and make the following supplemental findings of fac t: 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
Exhibit 44. December 19, 2009 – January 28, 2010 investigation time -line of Chief 
Bruce Gates.  
3  Exhibit 69. Concurrent with his civil service matter, the Appellant filed a 
January 23, 2013 claim  with the Department of Labor Relations (DLR), alleging that the 
Union had breached its duty of fair representation by a) advising him to sign the LCA; b) 
allowing the Town to bring another charge against him; c) failing to challenge Chief Gates’ 
June 7, 2012 order; and d) by failing to argue that the Board of Selectmen should not decide 
on the falsification of records charge against him. The DLR dismissed the matter on April 17, 
2013. Levesque v. New Engla nd Police Benevolent Assoc. , Inc.,  Docket No. MUPL -13-2569, 
Decision (Dep’t of Labor Relations, Ap r. 17, 2013), aff’d  (Employment Relations Bd., Sept. 
24, 2013).  
Exhibit 70. The Union’s response to the Appellant’s April 26, 2013 appeal of the April 
17, 2013 DLR decision to the Employment Relations Board (ERB).  
Exhibit 71. The ERB affirmed the decision  of the DLR investigator.  Levesque v. New 
Engla nd Police Benevolent Assoc. , Inc.,  Docket No. MUPL -13-2569, Decision (Employment 
Relations Bd., Sept. 24, 2013).  7 
  
FINDINGS OF FACT  
I. Discipline of Department Officers  
52. Around the first week of July, 2012, Lt. David Michael 
Mankiewicz, head of Internal Affairs, advised then -Chief Bruce Gates that 
as a result of the Levesque investigation, he had checked the traffic 
enforcement grant activity reports of the other officers participating in the 
Click it or Ticket Program. Lt. Mankiewicz noticed that on his May 17, 
2012 grant activity sheet, Patrolman Angelo Joseph LaPanna, III had also 
entered the registration plate of W illiam Ferdinand. This registration plate 
had also been recorded on Adam Levesque’s grant activity sheets. Chief 
Gates advised Lt. Mankiewicz to find out from Mr. Ferdinand if he had 
been stopped by Officer LaPanna.   (Exhibit 40.)  
53. At the time, Officer LaPa nna had been a patrolman for eleven 
years. He had not had any prior discipline.  (Exhibit 40.)  
54. Because the chief and the lieutenant were both out of the office 
for vacation days, they did not speak again until July 20, 2012. At this 
time, the lieutenant ad vised Chief Gates that Mr. Ferdinand had not been 
stopped by any police officers in the last few months.  Chief Gates then 
contacted Officer LaPanna and scheduled an interview for July 30, 2012 at 
3:00 p.m.  (Exhibit 40.)  
55. On July 26, 2012, Chief Gates hand  delivered a copy of the 
May 17, 2012 grant activity sheet and a letter advising of the July 30, 2012 
interview, enclosing an order not to discuss the matter with anyone except 
the chief and his legal representatives. Officer LaPanna admitted to the 8 
 chief that he had already discussed the matter with his wife and the union 
representative.   (Exhibits 34 and 40.)  
56. The interview proceeded as scheduled on July 30, 2012. As part 
of the investigation, Chief Gates ran an offline CJIS search to check the 
number of times the registration plate was run. The search revealed that the 
vehicle had had an active inspection sticker since November 2011. 
However, Officer LaPanna had said that he pulled over the vehicle because 
the inspection sticker was invalid. The CJIS sear ch also revealed that the 
registration plate had not been run in the sequence as described by Officer 
LaPanna.  (Exhibit 40.)  
57. As part of the investigation, Mr. Ferdinand also submitted 
written responses to questions from the chief. In his responses, Mr. 
Ferdinand noted that he had not been pulled over by Officer LaPanna. He 
confirmed that his vehicle had been properly inspected.  (Exhibit 40.)  
58. The investigation concluded with a Settlement Agreement 
among the Town of Middleborough (Town), the Union and Offic er 
LaPanna. Officer LaPanna agreed that he had not pulled Mr. Ferdinand’s 
vehicle over “or go through the other steps required for a motor vehicle 
stop.” The parties agreed that the conduct warranted a suspension without 
pay for three shifts. However, beca use of Office LaPanna’s lack of a 
disciplinary record and his agreement to relinquish two vacation days, the 
Town agreed not to discipline him for the incident. The parties further 
agreed that if Officer LaPanna did not engage in any other conduct 
warranti ng suspension without pay, the document would be removed from 
his personnel file if a prospective employer requested his file for 9 
 consideration of a position.  (Exhibit 40.)  
59. On October 8, 2008 at approximately 2:00 a.m., while he was 
on duty, uniformed and  wearing his service weapon, Sgt. R. drove to his 
family home in his police cruiser.  (Exhibit 41.)  
60. Sgt. R. entered the bedroom where his eighteen -year old was 
sleeping. He struck her in the face, causing pain and bruising. He pulled 
her hair, yelled at he r and informed her that she could no longer live in the 
family home.  (Exhibit 41.)  
61. Sgt. R.’s fifteen -year old daughter woke up and went to see 
what was going on. Sgt. R. yelled at her, pushed her and used his chest and 
body to bump her back towards her ow n bedroom. He also grabbed her by 
the neck, threw her into her bedroom and pushed her on to the bed. When 
the fifteen -year old kicked at Sgt. R. to keep him away, he raised his closed 
fist at her.  (Exhibit 41.)  
62. Sgt. R. eventually left the home, only to dr ive by a few minutes 
later, parking and observing the home for approximately ten minutes some 
distance away.  (Exhibit 41.)  
63. After the boyfriend of the older daughters came to take both 
girls to a safe place for the night, Sgt. R. pulled in behind the boyfr iend’s 
car so that he couldn’t leave. He then exited the cruiser, and began yelling 
and demanding to know where his daughters were going. Sgt. R. then 
reached into the passenger side window and tried to slap the younger 
daughter. He eventually moved the cr uiser upon his wife’s pleas. As his 
daughters left in the car, he threatened, “Wait ‘til I see you next time.”  
(Exhibit 41.)  10 
 64. Before his shift ended at 8:00 a.m., Sgt. R. approached Sergeant 
Robert Ferreira and gave a false account of the incident, omittin g 
references to his assaultive behavior. Toward the end of his shift, the 
sergeant also used a Department computer to compose a letter to his wife, 
complaining about her “sticking up” for her daughters.  (Exhibit 41.)  
65. On February 5, 2009, Sgt. R. was issue d a Notice for a March 4, 
2009 Section 41 hearing for the purpose of determining whether he should 
be disciplined, up to and including discharge from employment, for 
engaging in misconduct while on duty on the morning of October 8, 2008. 
The Notice advised  of the charge of conduct unbecoming a police officer, 
with the specific violations of the following Department Rules and 
Regulations: 1) Professional Conduct and Responsibilities; 2) Improper or 
Unsuitable Conduct; 3) Criminal Conduct; 4) Neglect of Duty;  and 5) 
Untruthfulness.  (Exhibit 41.)  
66. Sgt. R., his daughters, the older daughter’s boyfriend, the 
younger daughter’s school adjustment counselor and Sgt. Ferreira were 
among the witnesses. In its March 17, 2009 Notice of Decision, the Board 
of Selectmen ( Board) found that not only was the sergeant’s testimony 
self-serving and not credible, witnesses including his older daughter 
amended their testimony in order to protect his career. The Board found 
that Sgt. R. was untruthful in his account of the October 8, 2009 events in 
his verbal report to Sgt. Ferreira later that morning. The Board also found 
that he was untruthful during the hearing before the Board.  (Exhibit 41.)  
67. The Board issued five findings of fact, finding that on October 
8, 2009: 1) Sgt. R. had  driven his cruiser to his home without authorization; 11 
 2) that he had struck his older daughter in the face; 3) that he had assaulted 
his younger daughter; and 4) that he had a confrontation with his daughter 
and her boyfriend in the driveway. The Board fo und that Sgt. R.’s conduct 
was unacceptable for a Department police officer. Further, his actions were 
particularly egregious for a police sergeant who is expected to lead by 
example and is responsible for supervision of subordinate officers.  
(Exhibit 41. ) 
68. The Board found that there were unique circumstances, and 
coupled with the sergeant’s lack of previous discipline, decided to impose 
discipline short of discharge. The Board imposed an immediate three -
month suspension, a reduction in rank from sergeant t o patrolman, and an 
order to submit to a mental health evaluation and an order to successfully 
complete any treatment recommended by the Town’s physician. Further, 
Sgt. R.’s return to work was contingent upon certification from the Town 
physician. Finally,  any failure on Sgt. R.’s part to comply with any of the 
preceding conditions, or with any follow -up orders from the police chief, 
would form a separate basis for more discipline, up to and including 
discharge.  (Exhibit 41.)  
69. On March 26, 2010, Sgt. Joseph  Perkins issued Patrolman BC a 
letter of reprimand for failing to write a supplemental report for a 
September 2009 arrest. Due to the heavy call volume on the night of the 
arrest, the sergeant expected BC to complete the supplemental report at a 
later time . As the case approached pretrial in February 2010, Sgt. Perkins 
asked BC again to complete the supplemental report. When the sergeant 
inquired again early in March 2010, BC admitted that he had lost the 12 
 information due to the passage of time. Sgt. Perkins  reminded BC that per 
Department policy, all reports should be completed in a timely manner, and 
all direct orders are to be followed.  (Exhibit 42.)  
70. On July 15, 2011, Lt. Mackiewicz supervised the 4:00 p.m. to 
12:00 a.m. shift. Because of a shortage cause d by granting a day off to an 
officer, the midnight shift fell below the required minimum staffing of five 
officers. When Lt. Mackiewicz was unable to fill the shift with a 
patrolman, he offered it to the supervisors and took the position himself.   
(Exhib it 43.)  
71. When roll call was called at 11:45 p.m., Patrolman KD was 
absent. After KD did not answer repeated calls made to his phone, Sgt. 
Perkins was dispatched to KD’s home to ask him to report to work. When 
Sgt. Perkins went to KD’s home, he found his veh icle parked there and his 
dogs making a racket, but ended up banging on the door to no avail.  
(Exhibit 42.)  
72. Lt. Mackiewicz then went to bar where KD’s girlfriend worked. 
The bartender telephoned the girlfriend on behalf of the lieutenant, and got 
KD on th e line. Lt. Mackiewicz informed KD that he had a midnight shift 
and that the Department was running the shift short. When KD replied that 
he was unaware that he was scheduled to work because 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 
a.m. was his regular shift schedule, Lt. Macki ewicz reminded him that the 
schedule had been posted for a week. KD said that he was at the Taunton 
Beagles and was unable to report for work. Lt. Mackiewicz told him to 
expect disciplinary action.  (Exhibit 43.)  
73. Because Sgt. Debra A. Batista was unable to  find someone to 13 
 fill the shift, the July 16, 2011 12:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. shift fell below 
minimum staffing levels. Lt. Mackiewicz decided to take a patrol sector, 
and to summon mutual aid if a situation arose.  (Exhibit 43.)  
74. On July 17, 2011, KD submitt ed a letter of apology to Lt. 
Mackiewicz. He admitted that he had been informed of the July 16, 2011 
scheduled in an electronic mail message from Lt. Andrade. KD stated that 
he had made a mistake.  
75. On July 22, 2011, KD appeared for an administrative interv iew 
with Chief Gates and Officer Schofield. The chief then disciplined KD for 
violating Department rules in 1) refusing to obey a lawful order when he 
failed to obey Lt. Mackiewicz’s order and report for duty on the July 16, 
2011 12:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. sh ift; and 2) and in failing to report for duty 
whenever so ordered by proper police authorities at a regularly appointed 
time and absenting himself from duty without leave. The discipline was 
meted out as follows: one day suspension for refusing to obey a l awful 
order, reduced to a four -hour extra duty bicycle shift; a one -day suspension 
for failing to report to duty, reduced to a four -hour extra duty bicycle shift; 
and deduction of a personal day in order to reimburse the Department for 
paying him for the u nworked July 16, 2011 shift. Chief Gates agreed to 
purge the disciplinary letter from KD’s personnel file if he had no similar 
disciplinary issues in the following six months.  (Exhibit 43.)  
76. On July 25, 2011, Chief Gates filed a memorandum in regard to 
KD’s discipline. The chief noted that the officer had no prior discipline, 
and was credible in his assertion that he had forgotten about his shift 
change. The chief also noted that KD would not have taken the call on his 14 
 girlfriend’s phone if he had something  to hide. KD admitted that he had 
been drinking, and so could not show up to work.  (Exhibit 43.)  
 
Investigation of Appellant’s Prior Discipline  
77. On March 8, 2010, Chief Gates asked Mr. Levesque to submit a 
written report as part of the investigation in reg ard to the compromised 
drug operation that led to the LCA, including responses to twenty -five 
provided questions. Question 8 stated:  
Did you want a role in the [JP] investigation? Did you ask to have a role? Who 
did you ask? Were you disappointed or upset that you were not involved in the 
[JP] investigation? Did you express it to anyone? To whom? When? What did 
you say?  
 
(Exhibit 54.)  
78. Mr. Levesque responded:  
Yes I did want a role in the [JP] investigation. As a professional I like to utilize 
the talents th at I have to help solve crime. I do not remember if I asked to have 
a role. I was disappointed that I did not have a role in this investigation 
because personally I wanted to catch [JP]. As far as expressing this to anyone I 
do not recall if I did or not.  
 
(Exhibit 55.)  
79. As part of the investigation, the Department also interviewed 
JW. JW is the cousin of JP, and was an individual known to the police.  
(Exhibit 58.)  
80. On May 7, 2010, Chief Gates interviewed Mr. Levesque in the 
presence of Mr. Hanley, Mr. Pelo quin, the Town Counsel, and Lt. 
Mankiewicz. In the interview, Mr. Levesque confirmed his disappointment 
that he was not part of the JP investigation. He also admitted that he had 
arrested JP on at least three occasions. When the chief inquired as to why 
JW would report that Mr. Levesque had revealed the existence of a GPS 15 
 device on his cousin JP’s car, the following exchange occurred:  
Chief Gates: … I’m asking if you know a reason or motivation for him to try to 
make that statement up on tape to a Middlebor ough Police Officer.  
 
Appellant: I have no factual basis, I have my own opinion but nothing factual.  
 
Chief Gates: And what’s that opinion?  
 
Appellant: My opinion is that to get me their biggest thorn in their side out of 
the way and possibly protect someo ne else.  
 
Chief Gates: And if you would know why do you think [JW] would pick you 
over thirty -eight other Middleborough Police Offices to make this up?  
 
Appellant: My opinion, Chief, I’m high profile.  
 
Chief Gates: In what manner?  
 
Appellant: In terms of the Police Department, I’m high profile.  
 
Chief Gates: You mean you’re proactive?  
 
Appellant: Correct. You know, in terms of that kind of community. I’m well 
known by the criminals in terms of …  
 
Chief Gates: Why are you well known?  
 
Appellant: Because I’ m very pro -active. I really enjoy my job and I like getting 
bad guys off the street and I guess that makes a name for yourself within that 
community.  
 
(Exhibit 58.)  
81. The interview continued on June 17, 2010. On July 1, 2010, Mr. 
Peloquin submitted a propos ed Settlement Agreement/Last Chance 
Agreement to Mr. Hanley in order to resolve the disciplinary matter. The 
agreement would be subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, but 
the chief and the Town Manager had already agreed to recommend it as an 
alternative to a civil service hearing.  (Exhibits 59 and 60.)  
82. On July 1, July 6, July 12, July 14, July 19, July 20, July 21, 
July 26, July 30, August 2 and August 3, 2010, Mr. Hanley and Mr. 16 
 Peloquin exchanged electronic mail messages about the drafting o f the 
Agreement. There was negotiation about the terms acceptable to Mr. 
Levesque.  (Exhibits 61 -63.) 
83. On January 23, 2013, concurrent with his civil service hearing, 
Officer Levesque filed a breach of duty of fair representation claim against 
NEPBA with th e Division of Labor Relations (DLR). G.L. c. 150E, § 
10(b)(1). Mr. Levesque alleged that the Union 1) permitted the Town to 
violate his due process rights during the termination hearing and the related 
investigation when it a) failed to demand two separate  proceedings to 
address two separate alleged offenses against him; b) failed to challenge 
the legality of the Order that the Town claimed he violated, which denied 
him the ability to speak to his coworkers/potential witnesses about the 
allegations against him; c) breached its duty of fair representation by 
failing to require that the Board rule on the central underlying charge – 
falsification of records – when it voted to terminate; and 2) the Union 
further breached its duty of fair representation when it a dvised and 
permitted Mr. Levesque to execute an unconscionable and grossly unfair 
Last Chance Agreement dated August 6, 2010. Mr. Levesque claimed that 
he was unaware of the breach until the time of his termination on August 6, 
2012.  (Exhibit 68.)  
84. On Apri l 17, 2013, the DLR investigator dismissed Mr. 
Levesque’s claim. The investigator specifically addressed Mr. Levesque’s 
claim that he signed the LCA because he was unaware of Lt. Mackiewicz’s 
July 16, 2010 letter that the charge that was unsubstantiated. T he 
investigator noted that the LCA stated within its four corners that the 17 
 charge of alerting JP was unfounded, and that Mr. Levesque had failed to 
“provide complete information despite specific and written and verbal 
directives given to him by the  Chief and that this was a violation of the 
Department’s rules and regulations.”  (Exhibits 4 and 69.)  
85. Mr. Levesque appealed the DLR dismissal to the Employment 
Relations Board (ERB). On September 24, 2013, the ERB reviewed Mr. 
Levesque’s appeal of the DLR decisi on, and found that Mr. Levesque’s 
arguments quarreled with how the Union had represented him. “However, 
unions, even when represented by an attorney, are not required by law to 
represent grievants as an attorney would represent clients.” ERB found that 
the fact that the Union may have made other or different arguments on Mr. 
Levesque’s behalf when representing him is insufficient to establish a 
violation of the law in the absence of evidence that its strategy amounted to 
a breach of the duty of fair represe ntation.   (Exhibit 71.)  
CONCLUSION AND ORDER  
  I followed the orders of the court, admitted evidence and took testimony for the 
discrete and limited purpose of determining the validity of the Agreement and whether the 
Appellant’s conduct warranted termina tion independent of the Agreement.  
  Both parties submitted new exhibits. I have reviewed all the evidence, and made 
additional findings.  
The Last Chance Agreement was Valid  
   Mr. Levesque entered into this Agreement with the advice of counsel and upon 
admission that he should not have shared details about a drug investigation with his wife. Mr. 
Levesque was actively involved in negotiating the terms of the Agreement. In fact, he and his 
counsel conferred with the Department many times. The parties excha nged numerous 18 
 electronic mail messages. It was advantageous for Mr. Levesque to enter into such an 
agreement, and he did so in lieu of a Board hearing with the potential for termination.  
  Mr. Levesque has repeatedly referred to the July 16, 2010 Internal Affairs 
memorandum from Lt. Mackiewicz to Chief Gates, alleging that the Department withheld 
exonerating information from him during the JP investigation, specifically that the 
Department could not substantiate that he had improperly revealed that JP was u nder 
surveillance.  (Exhibit 4.)  I find that Mr. Levesque was not coerced or tricked into signing the 
LCA. The LCA clearly states that the IA “will find that the charge that Levesque alerted [JP] 
is unfounded,” and focused on Mr. Levesque’s refusal to obe y the chief’s directives and 
supply information during the investigation. Mr. Levesque admitted, and it is stated within the 
LCA, that “he admits he could have given more complete and definitive information.”  
(Exhibit 3.)  
I addressed Mr. Levesque’s arroga nce and self -aggrandizement in my first decision, 
and those characteristics are present again in Finding of Fact 79. Mr. Levesque badly wanted 
to be part of the JP drug investigation, and imagined for himself within the Department a role 
greater than that of a patrolman. His vanity clouded his judgment and steered his conduct in 
the JP matter.  
Mr. Levesque’s Conduct Warranted Termination even in the Absence of a LCA  
  Even in the absence of a Last Chance Agreement, the Appellant’s conduct was 
egregious. Fir st he submitted incorrect information on his grant activity reports in the Click it 
or Ticket program. Then he coerced a Department witness to reveal information during the 
ensuing Department investigation, in violation of the Chief’s June 7, 2012 Order no t to 
discuss the matter with anyone. He then used that information during the second day of the 
Section 41hearing. 4  
                                                           
4  I wrote in the May 1, 2014 Tentative Decision:  19 
   At this point, the Appellant had been a police officer for eleven years, and it was 
incumbent upon him to obey orders from his chief. In  fact, on the second day of his §41 
hearing, he admitted that he had made a “terrible mistake” in disobeying the chief’s Order not 
to contact witnesses or discuss the matter except with his Union representative or his attorney.  
  The Appellant complained that he received disparate treatment in comparison to other 
police officers who submitted inaccurate grant activity reports or broke other Department 
rules or regulations. I had precluded some of the Appellant’s exhibits from the first 
evidentiary hearing because they involved police officers who had never been disciplined. I 
admitted those exhibits, Exhibits 40 -44, in the hearing upon remand.  
A comparison of the officers in those exhibits reveal that the Appellant was assuredly 
the only police officer who  had had previous discipline. As the only officer with previous 
discipline, he was the only one subject to a Last Chance Agreement. Officers Collins, 
LaPanna and Dees cooperated fully with the Department investigations of their conduct. The 
Board of Select men found unique circumstances in the situation of Sgt. R.  
  The Town’s new exhibits shed further light upon the circumstances surrounding the 
negotiation of the LCA, Mr. Leveque’s termination and his Board of Selectmen hearing. I 
regret that the Town had  not offered them in the first hearing. That information may have 
made the previous administrative record more helpful to the court.  
  Mr. Levesque submitted incorrect information on the grant activity reports of the 
Click it or Ticket Program; was untrut hful during the ensuring investigation; tampered with a 
witness in direct violation of Chief Gates’ order; and lied under oath at the Board of 
Selectmen hearing, using the information he had gleaned from the witness tampering. I find 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
On June 28, 2012, the Appellant testified on  the first day of his §41 hearing.  The Appellant 
testified that he had mistakenly listed the location of the May 29, 2012 Ferdinand motor 
vehicle stop as Plympton and Thompson Streets, instead of Plympton and Plymouth Streets.  I 
infer that the Appellant’ s testimony differed from his grant activity reports because he had 
already spoken to Ferdinand, and learned that Ferdinand had told the Department’s 20 
 that Mr. Levesque’s co nduct showed a pattern of dishonesty in sharp distinction from the 
behavior of the other disciplined officers, and warranted termination independently of the 
Agreement. Further, I find that there was a valid Last Chance Agreement (LCA) in effect 
which woul d have triggered his termination.  
   Based on the preponderance of credible evidence presented at the hearing, I conclude 
that the Town of Marlborough had just cause to terminate Adam Levesque.  Accordingly, I 
recommend that the appeal be dismissed.  
SO OR DERED.  
 
 
DIVISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW APPEALS  
Angela McConney Scheepers  
Administrative Magistrate  
 
DATED:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
investigators that he had traveled to the Appellant’s home via Plymouth Street that day. 
(Findings of Fact  25 and 34.)  
 