1 
 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
 
SUFFOLK, ss.          CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
       One Ashburton Place, Room 503  
       Boston, MA 02108  
       (617) 979-1900  
 
GREGORY LEWANDOWSKI , 
 Appellant  
 
      v.      D1-18-196 
 
TOWN OF CHARLTON,  
 Respondent  
 
Appearance for Appellant:     Dale R. Kiley, Esq.  
BourgeoisWhite, LLP  
One West Boylston Street  
Suite 307  
Worcester, MA 01506  
 
Appearance for Respondent:     Leo J. Peloquin, Esq.  
       Norris, Murray& Peloquin, LLC  
       315 Norwood Park South  
Norwood, MA 02062  
 
Commissioner:      Christopher C. Bowman  
 
    
DECISION  
      
     On October 18, 2018,  the Appellant , Gregory Lewandowski  (Lt. Lewandowski ), pursuant to 
G.L. c. 31, § 43, filed an appeal with the Civil Service Commission (Commission) contesting the 
decision of the Town of Charlton (Town) to discharge him from  his position as the Lieutenant in 
the Charlton Police Department (CPD) on October 17, 2018 .  On January 8, 2019, I held a pre -
hearing conference at the offices of the Commission and a full hearin g was held at the Charlton 2 
 Public Library on March 11, 12 and June 12, 2019. 1  When citing the hearing transcripts: I is 
March 11 ; II is March 12 ; III is  June 12.  
     The parties had the private hearing transcribed by a Certified Court Reporter and Notary 
Public and the transcript was filed with the Commission as the official record of the proceeding. 
The witnesses were sequestered with the exception of Lt. Lewandowski  and, after he testified, 
Charlton Police Chief Graham Maxfield.   Following the close of the hearing, proposed decisions 
were submitted by the parties on August 2, 2019.     
FINDINGS OF FACT : 
     The Town submitted 74 separately numbered exhibits. (TE).  The Appellant submitted 
Exhib its A -R. (AE).   I left the record open for the Town to submit any written documentation 
prepared by Town Administrator Robin Craver regarding the proposed termination of the 
Appellant and the Town reported that there was none.   Based upon the documents adm itted into 
evidence and the testimony of the following witnesses:  
Called by  the Town:  
 
 Police Chief Graham Maxfield; (“GM” when citing testimony);  
 MJ, Charlton Police Department (CPD) Administrative Assistant (“MJ”);   
 Retired CPD Chief James Pervier (“JP” ); 
 Retired Interim CPD Chief Daniel Charette (“DC”);  
 Charlton Human Resources Director (HRD) Jessica Lewerenz (“JL”);  
 Former Charlton Assistant Treasurer/Accountant/Human Resources Director  MR; (“MR”);  
 Charlton Town Administrator Robin Craver (“RC”) . 
  
Called by the Appellant:  
 
 Gregory Lt. Lewandowski , Appellant (“GL”);  
 MP, former (CPD) Administrative Assistant; (“MP”);  
 PR, former CPD part time Dispatcher; (“PR”);    
 CPD Lieutenant D D, who replaced Lt. Lewandowski  (“DD”);  
                                                 
1 The Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure, 801 CMR §§ 1.00, et seq. , apply to 
adjudications before the Commission with G.L. c. 31, or any Commission rules, taking precedence.  
 3 
  CPD Patrol Officer JM, also president of the Charlton Police Alliance collective bargaining 
unit (“JM”);  
 CPD Patrol Officer TS (“TS”) . 
 
and taking administrative notice of all matters filed in the case and pertinent statutes, case law, 
regulations, policies, and reasonable in ferences from the evidence, a preponderance of credible 
evidence establishes the following facts:  
1. The Town of Charlton, located in Western Massachusetts, has a population of approximately 
15,000.   The Charlton Police Department (CPD) has twenty (20)  full-time sworn officers: 
fourteen (14) Patrol officers; four (4) S ergeants; the Lieutenant and the Chief.  The 
Lieutenant, including when Lt. Lewandowski  held the position, is second in command of the 
Department, essentially performing the duties of a Deputy Ch ief. ( Testimony  of JP-I, 245). 
There are four (4) full-time dispatchers, three (3) special officers, a dozen auxiliary officers 
and a full -time administrative assistant. The Department has an annual operating budget of 
$2.4 million . (Testimony of GM-II, 31 8, 476 -78). 
2. Part-time and full -time Police Officers and Sergeants and full -time Dispatchers are the 
positions in the Charlton Police Alliance ( “CPA ”) bargaining unit , with their terms and 
conditions of employment covered by the collective bargaining agreement between the Town 
and the CPA. (TE 7; CPA CBA ).   
3. The positions of Lieutenant and Chief and the CPD Administrative Assistant position are 
listed in the Charlton Personnel Poli cies and Procedures , (Personnel By -Laws ; TE 6, Article 
220-2.1), which set s forth terms and conditions of employment for covered positions, 
including vacation, sick leave, personal days and holidays. (TE 6, Article 4 -1. Benefits,  
Applicability and interpre tation; Article 5 -1. Policy, Definitions, Eligible Employee).  4 
 4. Lt. Lewandowski  has a Bachelor ’s Degree in Exercise Science and two ( 2) Masters ’ Degrees, 
one (1) in Criminal Justice and the other in Public Administration. ( Testimony of GL-II, 
716). 
5. Then -Chief James Pervier (“Pervier”) appointed Lt. Lewandowski  to be an Auxiliary Police 
Officer ( “APO ”) in the Charlton Auxiliary Police Unit (“CAPU”) effective July 15, 2002 .  
(TE 9).  The APO position is not included in the Personnel By -Laws .  (TE 6, Article  220-
2.1).  An APO is an unpaid volunteer who can only exercise police powers when called to 
active duty by the Chief.  Like all  APO s, Lt. Lewandowski  was allowed to work police 
details for private vendors, who would pay him through the CPD.   (Testimony of GL-II, 807 -
08; Testimony of GM-I, 325 -26; Testimony of JP-II, 235 -37; Testimony of JM-II, 673 -74). 
6. Lt. Lewandowski ’s first employment as a full -time Police Officer was with the Millville 
Police Department from June 2, 2003 through August 4, 20 05. (TE 11,  50).  
7. On December 11, 2003, Lt. Lewandowski  resigned from his Charlton APO position (TE 10,  
50). 
8. On September 27, 2005 , about two (2) months after he left his position as a Millville Police 
Officer, the Charlton Board of Selectmen appointed Lt. Lewandowski  as a full -time police 
officer.  He was sworn in on or about October 11, 2005. (TE 12,  50).  
9. On July 1, 2013, on the recommendation of then-Chief Pervier, the Town appointed Lt. 
Lewandowski  to be the CPD Lieutenant. (TE 14,  50).  
10. Upon his promo tional appointment to lieutenant, Lt. Lewandowski  was told by then -Chief 
Pervier that he would receive all the benefits that are given to Charlton police officers 
through the CBA, except that vacation and sick leave accrual would now be pursuant to the 
Personnel Bylaws. (Testimony of GL, 764 -765) 5 
 11. Knowing that Chief Pervier was likely to retire within the next couple of years, Town 
Administrator Robin Craver encouraged Lt. Lewandowski  to begin attending various town 
meetings, including meetings with the Fina nce Committee regarding the Police Department’s 
budget.  She was disappointed when Lt. Lewandowski  appeared at a Finance Committee 
meeting wearing gym attire and counseled him to dress in more professional attire in the 
future.  He accepted the advice but did not appear at future meetings. (Testimony of RC)  
12. Pervier retired December 31, 2016.   The Town appointed former South bridge  Chief Daniel 
Charette (“Charette ”) to be Provisional (Interim) Chief effective January 1, 2017.   Charette 
served  as Chief  until October 2, 2017. (TE 8; Testimony of DC -I, 100 ).  
13. In 2017, Charette issued a two -day suspension against Lt. Lewandowski  relating to problems 
with the Department’s failure to invoice and collect payment from utilities and others for 
police details p erformed.  ( TE 55) Serving as the hearing officer, Ms. Craver inquired 
whether the penalty could be increased, but ultimately chose to simply affirm the two -day 
suspension. (Testimony of RC)  
14. Following an assessment center, the Board of Selectmen appointed Sergeant Graham 
Maxfield (“Maxfield”) to Chief.   Maxfield started as Chief a fter signing an October 2, 2017 
Employment Agreement  with the Town that included some specific terms and conditions of 
his employment .  (TE 8; Maxfield Employment Agreement ).  
Issues Related to Longevity Payment Made to Lt. Lewandowski  
 
15. Prior to July 1, 2016, the pertinent part of the longevity article in the  CPA  CBA  read:  
 
 Upon implementation of this contract and on every July 1 thereafter, all full time 
employees covered under this Agreement shall be eligible for a longevity 
payment according to the terms set forth below:  
 
Years of Service                                               Annual Payment  
11 years      $100  6 
 15 years                                                           $150  
19 years                                                           $200  
(TE 74, Article 30).  
    
16. The Town and the CPA signed a Memorandum of Understanding  June 28, 2016 reflecting 
the changes that would become part of the  parties’  July 1 2015 -June 30, 2018 CBA, 
including the following longevity change:    
 Beginning July 1, 2016 and thereafter, all full time employees covered under this 
Agreement shall be eligible for a longevity payment according to the terms set 
forth below:  
 
Years of Service                                               Annual Payment  
10 years      $200  
15 years                                                           $400  
20 years                                                           $1,000 (TE 74, Article 30).  
    
17. Longevity  was a once annual payment intended to be given in the first week of July based 
upon a person’s years of service as of July 1st.  For example, if an employee  had 19 years of 
service as of October 1, 2016  (FY17) , he/she was entitled to a $400 payment as of July 1, 
2017  (FY18) , even though he/she would have 20 years of service as of October 1, 2017 
(FY18).  The $1,000 payment would not take effect until July 1, 2018. (Testimony of JP, JL 
GL and MR)  
18. As of July 1, 2017, Chief Maxfield was a Sergeant on the Char lton Police Department with 
nineteen years of service, having a start date of September 20, 1997. (Ex. A).  
19. As a Sergeant, Chief Maxfield, along with three other officers who had the same start date, 
received a longevity payment under the budget prepared by  Interim Chief Charette on July 1, 
2017 of $1,000.  The payroll submission for this longevity payment was prepared by the 
Chief’s Administrative Assistant, MP, and signed by Lt. Lt. Lewandowski  as required by the 
Town’s policy.  This represented an overpayment of $600. (Testimony of MR pp. 87 -88; 
Testimony of JL pp. 217 -219).  7 
 20. Even though there was no longevity benefit in the Personnel By -Laws  prior to October 16, 
2017, Pervier learned that his p redecessor, Chief Stevens, had received longevity under the 
provisions of the CPA CBA . From this, Pervier determined that the CPD Chief and 
Lieutenant were allowed to continue to get longevity under the terms of the CPA CBA . 
(Testimony of JP-II, 253 -54).    
21. Lt. Lewandowski  did not earn a longevity benefit under the CPA CBA while a patrol officer. 
The first longevity payment that Lt. Lewandowski  received from the Town was for $200 in 
July, 2016 /FY 17  (10 years of full time police service  in Charlton ).  His second longevity 
payment was for $200 he received in July, 2017 /FY 18  (11 years of service).   
22. With the hiring of its first Human Resources Director, JL, the Town established a Human 
Resources Department in March, 2017.  MR, who was already employed as the  Assistant 
Treasurer, began to also serve as Assistant Human Resources Direct or. (Testimony of JL-I, 
169).  
23. On October 16, 2017, Charlton Town Meeting added to the Personnel By -Laws  the following 
longevity benefit:  
As of every July 1 following completion o f the applicable, minimum number of 
years of continuous service  set forth below any eligible employee covered under 
this bylaw and still employed by the Town shall be eligible for an annual 
longevity payment (not added to the base salary) according to the terms set forth 
below:  
 
10 years but less than 15 years                          $200.00 per year  
15 years but less than 20 years                          $400.00 per year  
20 years but less than 25 years                          $600.00 per year  
25 years or m ore                                               $1,000.00 per year  
 
Such increases shall not be cumulative.  Rather, for example, an employee having 
completed fifteen (15) years' continuous service shall receive a total, additional 
four hundred dollars ( $400) per year [rather than two hundred dollars ($200) plus 
four hundred dollars ($400)] until the July 1 following completion of twenty (20) 
years' continuous service, at which point the employee would receive a total 8 
 additional six hundred dollars ($600)  per year [not four hundred dollars ($400)  
plus six hundred dollars ($600)].” (TE 6, Article 220 -4.15; underlining added).  
 
24. The Personnel By -Laws  pre-existing definition of “eligible employee” was, “One who is 
currently employed by the Town and who is regularly scheduled to work a minimum of 
twenty (20) hours per week.”  (TE 6, Article 220 -5.1).  
25. Lt. Lewandowski  understood that the  new longevity provision was effectively codifying the 
longevity benefit that  was already being paid to him and Pervier.  (Testimony of GL-II, 797).  
26. As referenced above, Lt. Lewandowski  had already received his $200 longevity payment in 
July 2017 based on the past practice of the Police Department to pay longevity to the Chief 
and Lieutenant, even though they were not covered by  the CBA.  The Town Meeting article, 
which now provided for all non -CBA employees (i.e. – managers) to receive a longevity 
payment, was adopted on October 2017.  
27. Ms. Craver  decided that the HR Department would process the new longevity payments 
under the Personnel By -Laws .  JL assigned the task to M R.  (Testimony of JL-I, 173).    
28. MR’s calculation s were based on her assumption that as long as the employee was currently  
an “eligible employee”, working 20 hours per week, all of the employee’s past service would 
count , regardless of whether the employee worked less than 20 hours per week during some 
of those past years.  (Testimony of MR-I, 30-34; Testimony of JL-I, 179-181, 188 -189).  
29. On November 15, 2017, MR sent an email to Department Heads and anyone in t he affected 
Department involved in the payroll process. For Lt. Lewandowski , the Longevity Chart  
showed: “ 7/15/02 ” (the date he began his service as an auxiliary  officer) as Date of Benefit 
Eligibility , “14” as Years of Service A/O 7/1/17  and “$200.00” as what he would earn for FY 
18 Longevity .  9 
 30. Using “7/15/02” instead of “10/11/05” did not change what MR determined that Lt. 
Lewandowski  had earned for FY 18 because he was still at the “ 10 years but less than 15 
years…$200.00 per year” level under the new  longevity provision.  (TE 6, 18) .  
31. At the time, MR  did not recall that, in July, when the Treasurer’s office had processed the 
longevity checks for all of the Departments with unionized employees, it had issued a $200 
longevity check for Lt. Lewandowski .  (TE 17; AE H: July 13, 2017 paycheck; Testimony of 
MR-I, 76-7). 
32. MR informed the November 15 email recipients that longevity [Personnel] Action Forms 
(“Longevity PAF”) had been sent to their interdepartmental mailboxes and, if they were 
signed and sent b ack to her by November 20, the longevity payments would be issued as a 
separate check in the following week’s payroll. (TE 18; Testimony of MR-I, 38-9, 49 -50).  
33. On November 15, Lt. Lewandowski  saw MR’s email, including his information on the 
Longevity Char t. (TE 18, 19).   Lt. Lewandowski ’s Longevity PAF  was circulated and signed 
by Maxfield and Ms. Craver .  On or about November 22, Lt. Lewandowski  received the $200 
longevity payment in his paycheck. (TE 20).    
34. In December of 2017,  while working on the CPD FY 2019 budget submission with new 
Administrative Assistant MJ, Maxfield learned for the first time that , prior to the Personnel 
By-Laws  longevity article, the Department had been processing longevity payments for Lt. 
Lewandowski  and the prior Chief and Lieutenant . The Chief also learned that Lt. 
Lewandowski  had r eceived the most recent Department initiated longevity payment of $200  
in July, 2017, meaning that Lt. Lewandowski ’s payment that resulted from the Longevity 
PAF Maxfield h ad signed in November was Lt. Lewandowski ’s second $200 payment in FY 
18. (Testimony of GM-I, 341 -44). 10 
 35. Maxfield asked Lt. Lewandowski  why he had received two (2) longevity payments, one (1) 
in July and one (1) in November.   Lt. Lewandowski  responded that he was entitled to it 
because of his anniversary date with the Town.   Maxfield  directed him to submit a written 
response . In a memo to Maxfield dated January 29, 2019, Lt. Lewandowski  wrote:  
1.) Why did I start receiving longevity pay before t he town voted on giving longevity 
pay to non -contractual employees?  
 
I was  told by Chief Pervier that I hit my 10 (ten) year anniversary in 
September [2015] and he began paying me longevity pay in July of the 
next fiscal year [July 2016; FY 17].  
 
2.) Why did I accept the November longevity payment?   
The Town paid non -contractual employees longevity pay in November of 
2017. When we would calculate payroll for the next fiscal year, we would 
always compare our numbers to the town’s numbers. If there were any  
discrepancies, I believe that we always went with the town’s calculations. 
So we always checked our numbers to the Town’s numbers.  
 
Last November, I learned that the town had me reaching my fifteen  (15) 
year mark in this past July. When I received the lo ngevity pay in 
November, I didn’t think much of it. I figured that it was an adjustment by 
the town, for hitting my fifteen (15) year anniversary. (TE 22).  
 
36. It did not make sense to Maxfield that Lt. Lewandowski  would get his very first longevity 
payment o f $200 (10 years) in July, 2016 and would then be eligible for a fifteen (15)  year 
payment in July, 2017.   He checked with HR Director JL , discovered that Lt. Lewandowski ’s 
actual start date as a full -time police officer  was October 11, 20 05 and sent Lt. Lewandowski  
an email asking him how he had learned that the town had him reaching the fifteen ( 15) year 
mark for longevity in November.  In his response, Lt. Lewandowski  attached and referenced 
the Longev ity Chart  that MR had sent him on November 15, which  had him at “14” years of 
service as of July 1, 2017, not  “15.” (TE 19; Testimony of GM-I, 350-4).  
 11 
 Additional Week of Vacation  
Article 6 of the CPA Contract reads in pertinent part:  
 Vacations (Full Time); Full time officers shall be granted vacation leave, with 
pay, as follows…120 hours after five years…160 hours after ten years.”  
 
 Each member of the bargaining unit hired before January 1, 2012 with prior full 
time police service sha ll have such prior service time added to creditable service 
with the Town of Charlton to determine the member’s annual vacation allowance. 
(TE 7, Art. 6)  
 
37. While in the CPA bargaining unit, under an agreement between the Town and the CPA, Lt. 
Lewandowski  was given credit for two ( 2) years and two ( 2) months of full -time police 
service in Millville.  In the document that Lt. Lewandowski  signed as part of the agreement, 
his Charlton date of hire for service toward vacation was “9/27/05.”  (TE 13).  
38. Lt. Lewando wski  was promoted to Police Lieutenant July 1, 2013 .  The Personnel By -Laws , 
which covers managers such as the Police Chief and Police Lieutenant, states.     
 After the first six months of continuous employment with Charlton ---2 (two) weeks 
of vacation per year;  
 
 After five years of continuous employment with Charlton ---3 (three) weeks of 
vacation per year;  
 
 After 10 years of continuous employment with Charlton ---4 (four) weeks of vacation 
per year;  
 
 After 15 years of continuous employment with Charlton ---5 (five) weeks of vacation 
per year.  (TE 6, 220-4.5; underlining added; ( Testimony of JP-II, 240 -2). 
39. Unlike longevity, increases in vacation time under both the CPA CBA  and the Personnel By -
Law are credited when  the employee  reaches the anniversary of continuous employment that 
puts the employee at the next level of vacation.  
40. In early December, 2017, Lt. Lewandowski  went to  MR’s Office.   As recounted by MR, “he 
(Lt. Lewandowski ) said that, according to the longevity sheet that was dispersed, we had his 12 
 start date as 7/15/02, therefore, he thinks we had an issue, an error in his vacation time, and 
wanted me to take a look at it.”  Lt. Lewandowski  told MR that “we had not been pro cessing 
the vacation start date the same as the longevity start date, therefore, he was owed an 
additional week of vacation time … he asked me to look at it.” MR reviewed the Longevity 
Chart , told Lt. Lewandowski  that he was right and that she would prepar e a vacation 
personnel action form. ( “Vacation PAF ”). Lt. Lewandowski  said “Okay.” MR prepared and 
signed the Vacation PAF .  (Testimony of MR- I, 23-24; 54 -62; TE 21) . 
41. The Vacation PAF  still had to be signed by Chief Maxfield and Ms. Craver .  Lt. 
Lewandows ki brought the form t o Maxfield while the Chief was in a meeting in his office 
with Administrative Assistant MJ .  Lt. Lewandowski  handed Maxfield  the Vacation PAF  
form and stated that he had “hit an anniversary.”   Maxfield  looked at the form  and asked , 
“You’ve been here 15 years already ?”  Lt. Lewandowski  said, “Yes.”  Maxfield  joked about 
whether he was buying a car as he signed the Vacation PAF .  (TE 21; Testimony of GM-I, 
336-340; Testimony of MJ-I, 495 -97).  Ms. Craver  subsequently signed the form an d Lt. 
Lewandowski  was credited with an additional forty ( 40) hours of vacation. (TE 21).   
42. When Maxfield was reviewing the circumstance of Lt. Lewandowski ’s longevity payment 
for FY 18, he learned from the HR Director that “7/15/02” was the date Lt. Lewand owski  
was appointed to the position of auxiliary police officer.  Chief Maxfield was not aware, nor 
was he informed, at that time, that Lt. Lewandowski  had resigned his position as an auxiliary 
officer with the Town in December 2003. (Testimony of GM-I, 354-55; Testimony of JL-I, 
183-190).   
43. Chief Maxfield then met with Lt. Lewandowski  regarding the longevity issue.  Chief 
Maxfield told Lt. Lewandowski :  “the auxiliary time doesn’t count for purpose of benefits 13 
 and longevity, and I knew that he was aware of that.”  During that conversation, Chief 
Maxfield  “remembered that I signed that vacation form and I asked him ‘Did you get another 
week’s vacation based on this date?’ and he said ‘yes’”.  Chief Maxfield then told Lt. 
Lewandowski  “to get over to HR  and s quare this away, and to email [MR] and deduct that 40 
hours of vacation from the form that he had me sign.” (Testimony of GM-I, 355 -357, 475) .  
44. Lt. Lewandowski  sent an email  to MR on February 12 which read, “After speaking with my 
chief, he advised that vacation time does not count for auxiliary service and that we were at 
error with me attaining my 15 years of service time in Charlton. With that being said, could 
you please deduct the 40 hours from my vacati on time, please?”  Ultimately, CPD 
Administrative Assistant MJ deducted the forty ( 40) hours. (TE 23).   
45. Chief Maxfield  subsequently learned that there had been a break in service from when Lt. 
Lewandowski ’s auxiliary time ended (December 2003) and when he  became a full -time 
police officer for the Town (July 20 05).  When Chief Maxfield  learned about this break in 
service, he concluded that Lt. Lewandowski  had deliberately misled him.  He re-assigned Lt. 
Lewandowski ’s access to Department records and related  duties to one of the Sergeants and 
determined that he would further investigate Lt. Lewandowski .  (Testimony of Maxfield -I, 
359-64). On April 5, 2018, Maxfield placed Lt. Lewandowski  on paid administrative leave so 
that he could further investigate. (TE 2 4B). 
Lt. Lewandowski ’s written response during the investigation regarding a conversation he had 
with former Chief Pervier  
 
46. On May 21, 2018 , Chief Maxfield sent a notice and questions to Lt. Lewandowski  stating : 
 While I am not ordering you to provide the information under threat of discipline, 
I am ordering you as follows:  
 14 
 i. If you do choose to provide the information, you must tell the truth at all 
times. Untruthfulness includes making false statements and/or 
intentionally omitting significant or pertinent  facts….  
 
ii. Your failure to comply with these orders will constitute grounds for 
discipline, up to and including dismissal. This is separate and apart from 
discipline, if any, that arises from my investigation.  (TE 42 , pp. 1, 2). 
 
47. Through counsel, Lt. Lewan dowski  provided his response to the questions on May 29, 2018, 
including  signing a statement at the end of his responses that read, “These answers have been 
prepared with assistance of counsel and I have personally participated in responding to, and 
have r eviewed each answer, and attest to their completeness and accuracy.”  (TE 43, p. 11).  
48. Question 2(b) and Lt. Lewandowski ’s response to question 2(b) were as follows:  
 
  Prior to July 1, 2017, did you know that you were first promoted to Lieutenant on 
July 1, 2013 and that, unlike your position as a Police Officer, the position was not 
covered by the collective bargaining agreement between the Town and Charlton 
Police All iance?   
 
 “No.  [Former] Chief [James] Pervier discussed the differences between the Rank of 
Lieutenant and that of Patrol Officer…[I] was informed that the Chief and Lieutenant 
receive everything that “union” personnel receive with the exception of vacati on and 
sick time caps. Chief Pervier also informed [me] that [I ] would receive all the benefits 
that the previous Lieutenant received including credit for time on Millville Police 
Department for longevity calculations [as was in the union contract]. ” (TE 43, p. 3; 
underlining added) .  
 
49. At the March 12 Commission hearing , Lt. Lewandowski  provided the following testimony:  
“Lt. Lewandowski : I had a conversation with Chief Pervier – right before I got  
    promoted, I spoke with him about what the lieutenant w ould get – 
    if I was to take the lieutenant’s position what I would get for  
    benefits and stuff like that.  He informed me that I would get  
    everything that the union gets, anything that the past lieutenant  
    had, himself also, up to an includ ing whatever was in the union.  
 
Commissioner:   Okay.  But didn’t you explicitly answer somewhere that he told  
    you that you could use your Milville time for longevity purposes?  
 
Lt. Lewandowski :  In one of the questions that Chief Maxfield sent over ba ck in, I  
    believe it was May.  
 15 
 Commissioner:   Yes 
 
Lt. Lewandowski :  Yeah, it’s added on at the end.  I just thought – I just inferred that  
    that was part of that discussion because we got everything that the  
    union got.  
 
Commissioner:   All right.  So he never explicitly said those words to you, ‘You can  
    use your time as a Millville police officer for the longevity  
    calculations’?  
 
Lt. Lewandowski :  I just inferred that.”  
 
(Testimony of GL-II, 765 -67) 
Sick Leave Audit  
 
50. From Septe mber 27, 2005  to July 1, 2009, Lt. Lewandowski , like all other CPD employees 
accrued eight (8) hours  - (1 day) of sick leave a month.  Effective July 1, 2009, the accrual 
rate increased to ten (10) hours - (1.25 days) a month.  
51. Since Lt. Lewandowski  has been in the Department, an employee’s sick day has been 
recorded by CPD Dispatchers into the Department’s Sick Book .  If a Dispatcher took a call 
from an employee calling in sick, that would also be included in the dispatch logs. The Sick 
Book  was the  source of information for payroll records that recorded an employee’s sick 
leave use in each pay period.   
52. On July 1, 2008, the Department also started to enter used sick time into the “Tritech IMC ” 
Program,  in the Department’s computer system. ( Testimony  of GM-II, 390 -391). Lt. 
Lewandowski  has been in charge of the Tritech Records IMC System since he became the 
CPD Lieutenant on July 1, 2013. (TE 14A; AE O; Testimony of GL -II, 720 -721).  
53. Prior to when Lt. Lewandowski  was promoted to the CPD Lieutenant, the Town had to pay a 
departing employee a large sum of money for unused leave the Town did not know the 
employee had accrued. ( Testimony of DC-II, 102 -03).  In 2014, Ms. Craver asked Pervier to 16 
 audit the accrued leave  of Department employees, including si ck leave, so that any 
discrepancies between Department records and Town Hall records could be reconciled.   
(Testimony of JP-I, 249-50).  Administrative Assistant M P gathered the data from 
Department records and  completed the calculations. MP made sure tha t the audit included 
sick leave use recorded in the Department Sick Book . (Testimony of MP-II, 598 -599). Lt. 
Lewandowski , relying on MP’s work, put the audit for each employee on letterhead and 
submitted  the document to each employee. The document for Lt. Lewandowski  stated, “As of 
10/09/2014, Lieutenant has accrued the following hours…Sick: 626 .”  (Testimony of GL & 
TE 33).  
54. In February 2017, Charette directed Lt. Lewandowski  to conduct another accrued leave audit.  
Lt. Lewandowski  completed the audit and a ttached the Department “Sick Time as of 3 -1-17” 
document to an email he sent to Charette dated March 14, 2017.  Lt. Lewandowski  listed his 
accrued sick leave as of March 1, 2017 as 844 hours.  After verifying the hours with all 
employees by posting them on the CPD bulletin board, Charette submitted them to Town 
Hall. (TE 34; Testimony of DC-I, 108 -12).  
55. In December, 2017, another sick leave audit was completed.  New  Administrative Assistant 
MJ and Assistant HRD MR c omple ted the sick leave audit to reconcile CPD records with 
HRD  records. ( Testimony of GM-II, 390).  
56. Starting with the March 1, 2017 sick leave accrual  balances from the  most recent audit, MJ  
added/subtracted sick leave accrued and used through December 28, 2017 . (Testimony of 
MJ-II, 498 -99). She then prepared a standard notice for each employee, which Chief 
Maxfield signed, and placed it in the employee’s department mail box.  The notice to Lt. 
Lewandowski  read in pertinent part, “Please take a look at the following balances for time off 17 
 that we have for you as of December 28, 2017.  If you believe there is an error, please see me 
as soon as possible…Sick Time: 904 hours.  If the above balances are correct, please sign 
here.” (TE 35).   
57. Based on his pay advice dated December 28, 2017 showing that he had 912 hours of sick 
leave, which Lt. Lewandowski  accepted as correct, Lt. Lewandowski  made a handwritten 
note of 912 on the correspondence and brought it to Chief Maxfield.  The Chief reviewed the 
handwritten note and said “prove it.” (Testimony of GL, 731)  
58. In response Lt. Lewandowski  went back and audited his sick leave by calculating the  total 
possible amount of hours that could have accrued since starting full -time employment  in 
2005 , but only  deducted the amount of hours logged into the IMC / Tritech dispatch 
software , which the Department began using to track sick time usage in July 1 , 2008.  Thus, 
he failed to deduct any of the sick time usage from 2005 through July 1, 2008, which had 
been logged manually, and which had been deducted in the first audit conducted by former 
Administrative Assistant MP.  Thus, instead of 904 (or 912) hou rs, Lt. Lewandowski  
represented that his sick time balance should be 1186 hours as of December 28, 2017.  Chief 
Maxfield, his new administrative assistant and the Town’s Assistant HR Director accepted 
Lt. Lewandowski ’s representation and his employment rec ords were updated. (TE 36, 38, 
Testimony of GL, GM, MJ and MR)  
59. In preparation for this proceeding before the Commission, the Town searched and found sick 
book pages in the basement of the Police Department showing that Lt. Lewandowski  had 
taken 20 sick days or 160 hours that were not accounted for in his analysis. (Testimony of 
MJ, 523)   If those 160 hours were subtracted from Lt. Lewandowski ’s tally of 1186, his 
correct sick leave balance would have been 1026 hours.  18 
 60. Although Lt. Lewa ndowski  did his sick leave calculation with the omission of sick leave he 
had used prior to July 1, 2008, he held other Department employees to the prior audit, which 
took into account sick leave used prior to July 1, 2008.  ( Testimony of GL-II, 783).  An 
example was Dispatcher GF to whom Lt. Lewandowski  sent a January 8, 2018 notice 
referring to the October, 2014 audit:  
After review, I made a correction of your Sick Time balance from what was in the 
letter of December 28, 2017. During further reconciliati on of time off it was 
discovered that there were time off sheets that were signed off on in 2014. This 
gave us a better starting point on which to base current time off calculations. After 
recalculating the numbers, it showed that your Sick Time balance wa s different 
than what was originally thought. Please see the new balances below that are 
correct as of December 28, 2017. (TE 41) . 
 
61. Lt. Lewandowski  wrote further to GF that she had 116.25 hours of accrued sick leave as of 
December 28, 2017, and she signed off on that number. (TE 41).  GF had been employed by 
the Department since September 28, 1990. If Lt. Lewandowski  had applied the same 
calculation method he used for himself --i.e., only considering her sick leave use that had 
occurred since sick leave bega n to be entered in the Tritech IMC System July 1, 2008, GF’s 
sick leave balance as of December 28, 2017 would have been 1646.75 hours —1200 hours 
because of the maximum accumulation .  (TE 41; Testimony of GM -II, 403 -07).  
Use of 6 Vacation Days that were not recorded in payroll system    
 
62. When Pervier was Chief, Lt. Lewandowski  would make a written request to the Chief to use 
a vacation day, usually by email, and the approval would get copied to the Administrative 
Assistant by the Chief or Lt. Lewandowski  so she c ould enter it into the payroll system. 
(Testimony of JP- I, 293 -94).  19 
 63. During his nine (9) months as Interim Chief, Charette  had Lt. Lewandowski  sign the  weekly 
payrolls. Charette would only sign a payroll document if Lt. Lewandowski  was not availabl e. 
(Testimony of DC-I, 112 -13; Testimony of GL-II, 812 -13, 818).  
64. In a chain of emails dated May 1, 2017, Lt. Lewandowski  told Charette that he had sixteen 
(16) accrued vacation days and  two (2)  accrued personal days.  He asked the Chief:  
 To be allowed to use 6 (six) of the days on May 5, 19 and 26; June 9, 16 and 30;  
 To be allowed to roll over 5  (five) of the days into the next fiscal year;  and 
 For the Town/Department to buy back 7  (seven) days of vacation from him.  
65. After he asked Ms. Craver whether Town policy allowed an employee to sell back vacation 
days, and she said no, he denied Lt. Lewandowski ’s buyback request.  Charette approved Lt. 
Lewandowski ’s other two (2) requests. (TE 25). (Testimony of DC -I, 164 -65).  
66. Lt. Lewandowski  took vacation days on May 5, 19, 26 and June 9, 16 and 30, 2017.  Lt. 
Lewandowski  received a paycheck “advice” with each of his paychecks which included the 
employee’s current accrued sick (SPCS), personal  (PPCS) and vacation time (VCPS) in 
hours, as well as t he number of hours used during the pay period and in the year to date.  Lt. 
Lewandowski ’s paycheck advices for the six (6) pay periods that included the six (6) 
vacation days did not show that he had used any vacation hours.  (TE 32).  
67. Each of the six (6)  vacation days was in a separate payroll period.   None of the six  (6) days 
were documented in the six (6) separate payrolls .  Lt. Lewandowski  personally signed five 
(5) of the payrolls.  Charette signed one (1) of the payrolls in Lt. Lewandowski ’s absence 
without noticing that Lt. Lewandowski ’s May 6 vacation day wasn’t recorded.  (TE 26 ; TE 
166-67).  20 
 68. On September 7th and 12th, 2018, a local appointing authority hearing was held by a hearing 
officer designated by the Town. (Stipulated Facts)  
69. Lt. Lewandowski  did not testify at the local appointing authority hearing. (Stipulated Fact)  
70. On October 16, 2018, the Board of Selectmen, serving as the appointing authority, voted to 
adopt the recommendations of the hearing officer and terminate Lt. Lewandowski  from his  
employment. (Stipulated Fact)  
71. The termination letter, dated October 17, 2018 states in relevant part:  
 “You accepted a $200 longevity payment in November 2017 that you knew you had 
not earned and that the Town had paid by mistake.  
 Instead of taking steps t o correct the error in Town records that had your hire date as 
July 15, 2002 – not September 27, 2005 – for purposes of benefit accruals, you took 
advantage of it to obtain an extra week of vacation you had not earned.  
 You took six (6) days of vacation in May and June 2017 and did not deduct it from 
your accrued vacation, including on payrolls that you signed.  
 The evidence shows that you purpose fully  inflated your accrued sick leave by at least 
240 hours in Department records.  
 After being warned under threa t of dismissal to tell the truth in Chief Maxfield’s 
investigation, you failed to tell the truth when you claimed that former Chief James 
Pervier told you that you would receive Charlton service credit toward longevity for 
your prior employment with the Mi llville Police Department.”  
The last page of the termination letter states in part:  “ … [Y]ou chose to engage in a pattern of 
deception and outright lying with the goal of securing benefits to which you were not entitled.  
While you only pocketed $200, th at alone would justify your dismissal.  The vacation and sick 21 
 leave benefits that you were caught attempting to obtain were worth thousands of dollars .  And  
you lied in the investigation.” (TE 1)  
Applicable Law  
 G.L. c. 31, § 43 provides:  
 
“If the commission by a preponderance of the evidence determines that there was just cause for 
an action taken against [a tenured civil service employee] … it shall affirm the action of the 
appointing authority, otherwise it shall reverse such action and the perso n concerned shall be 
returned to his position without loss of compensation or other rights; provided, however, if the 
employee by a preponderance of the evidence establishes that said action was based upon 
harmful error in the application of the appointing  authority’s procedure, an error of law, or upon 
any factor or conduct on the part of the employee not reasonably related to the fitness of the 
employee to perform in his position, said action shall not be sustained, and the person shall be 
returned to his  position without loss of compensation or other rights.  The commission may also 
modify any penalty imposed by the appointing authority.”  
 
 An action is “justified” if it is “done upon adequate reasons sufficiently supported by 
credible evidence, when weig hed by an unprejudiced mind; guided by common sense and by 
correct rules of law.” Commissioners of Civil Service v. Municipal Ct. of Boston , 359 Mass. 
211, 214 (1971). See also  Cambridge v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 300, 304 
(1997); Selectmen o f Wakefield v. Judge of First Dist. Ct. , 262 Mass. 477, 482 (1928). The 
Commission determines justification for discipline by inquiring, “whether the employee has been 
guilty of substantial misconduct which adversely affects the public interest by impairin g the 
efficiency of public service.” School Comm. v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 486, 
488 (1997).  See also Murray v. Second Dist. Ct., 389 Mass. 508, 514 (1983).  
     The Appointing Authority’s burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence is satisfied 
“if it is made to appear more likely or probable in the sense that actual belief in its truth, derived 
from the evidence, exists in the mind or minds of the tribunal notwithstanding any doubts that 
may still linger there.” Tucker v. Pearlstein , 334 Mass. 33, 35 -36 (1956).  22 
 Under section 43, the Commission is required “to conduct a de novo hearing for the purpose of 
finding the facts anew.” Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006) and 
cases cited.  However, “[t]he commission’s task.. .is not to be accomplished on a wholly blank 
slate. After making its de novo findings of fact, the commission does not act without regard to 
the previous decision of the [appointing authority], but rather decides whether ‘there was 
reasonable justif ication for the action taken by the appointing authority in the circumstances 
found by the commission to have existed when the appointing authority made its decision’,” 
which may include an adverse inference against a complainant who fails to testify at th e hearing 
before the appointing authority” Id., quoting internally from Watertown v. Arria , 16 
Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983) and cases cited.   
      By virtue of the powers conferred by their office, police officers are held to a high  standard  
of conduct.  "Police officers are not drafted into public service; rather, they compete for their 
positions. In accepting employment by the public, they implicitly agree that they will not engage 
in conduct which calls into question, their ability and fitness to perfo rm their official 
responsibilities." Police Commissioner of Boston v. Civil Service Commission , 22 Mass.App.Ct. 
364, 371 (1986).  
Parties’ Arguments  
     In its post -hearing brief, the Town argues that the preponderance of the evidence supports 
each of the charges against Lt. Lewandowski ; that the Commission should draw an adverse 
inference against Lt. Lewandowski  for not testifying at the local hearing; an d that, given the 
serious nature of the charges, including untruthfulness, termination was the appropriate level of 
discipline to be imposed here.  23 
     In his post -hearing brief, Lt. Lewandowski  argues that the longevity issue that led to the 
investigation  and his ultimate termination was the product of unfair and disparate treatment 
among similarly situated employees; the investigation into peripheral matters and the findings 
were erroneous and merely a pretext to support a termination decision; and that Lt. Lewandowski  
has committed no wrongdoing.  
Analysis  
     I carefully considered all of the witness es’ testimony throughout the three days of hearing 
conducted at the Charlton Library.  I reviewed the testimony again by reading the transcripts.  I 
reviewed all of the exhibits, the stipulated facts and the post -hearing briefs submitted by the 
parties.  To e nsure clarity, I have not overlooked any of the witness testimony, proposed findings 
or arguments .   In those instances where  I did not include all or parts of the testimony of a 
witness in my findings, I did so not by omission, but rather, because I did n ot find the testimony 
relevant and/or I did not credit that portion of his/her testimony.  
     First, the evidence does not show that the investigation into Lt. Lewandowski  was a pretext to 
bring about his termination.  The investigation  began  based on a legitimate inquiry that arose 
when Chief Maxfield, as he was preparing to submit his first budget proposal as Police Chief, 
became aware that Lt. Lewandowski  had received a longevity payment of $200 in July 2017.  
This piqued Chief Maxfield’s interest for two reasons.  First, Chief Maxfield was not aware that, 
even prior to the Town Meeting vote in October 2017, the Police Chief and Lieutenant (non -
CBA employees) were receiving longevity payments.  Second, even if there was such a past 
practice, Chief Maxfi eld didn’t understand why Lt. Lewandowski  would have received a second 
$200 payment in November 2017.   Thus, he took the reasonable step of asking Lt. Lewandowski  
to provide an explanation.  When Lt. Lewandowski  replied with a partially non -responsive 24 
 reference to anniversary dates, Chief Maxfield asked him to put his reply in writing.  Rather than 
providing clarity, the written response by Lt. Lewandowski  raised even further questions which 
justified, if not compelled, the Chief’s decision to inquire furt her, and, ultimately, conduct a full 
investigation regarding all issues related to longevity payment s, sick time accrual and usage of 
vacation time.  
    I did consider Lt. Lewandowski ’s testimony that Chief Maxfield may have had a personal 
animus against h im based on an incident over a decade ago when Chief Maxfield, then a police 
sergeant, was apparently encouraging auxiliary police officers not to work paid details in a show 
of solidarity with the police union.  Apparently, Lt. Lewandowski  may have provid ed 
information to the Police Chief at the time regarding Maxfield’s actions.  Even if true, I don’t 
believe that this incident, which occurred over a decade ago, was a factor in Chief Maxfield’s 
decision to conduct an investigation regarding the matters re lated to the instant appeal.   Rather, 
based on the testimony of both Lt. Lewandowski  and Maxfield, the two men appeared to have at 
least a cordial, working relationship when Maxfield was first promoted to Police Chief.  
    I also considered Lt. Lewandowsk i’s argument that Ms. Craver targeted him for termination.  
As discussed in more detail below, there are indeed multiple examples of how, in regard to some 
of the individual charges (i.e. – the longevity payment), Ms. Craver seemed to inexplicably give 
certain other employees , including the Police Chief, the benefit of the doubt  about their actions 
or inactions regarding similar circumstances, while simultaneously concluding that Lt. 
Lewandowski  was acting in bad faith.  Importantly, however, as laid out in  the findings and 
discussed further below, there were multiple allegations against Lt. Lewandowski , most of which 
came about and/or were compounded by Lt. Lewandowski ’s then -ongoing statements and 25 
 actions.  Ms. Craver would have been negligent in her dutie s if she did not authorize and/or 
encourage an investigation into the multi -faceted unfolding allegations.   
     Having determined that the investigation was not a pretext to terminate Lt. Lewandowski , I 
turn to the issue of whether the Town has proven, b y a preponderance of the evidence, that Lt. 
Lewandowski  engaged in misconduct which warrants discipline.  I address the charges in the 
same order in which they are referenced in the findings.     
Longevity payment  
     Multiple Town employees received erroneous longevity payments including, but not limited 
to, Chief Maxfield  when he was serving as a sergeant.  On July 1, 2017, then -Sergeant Maxfield  
erroneously received a $1,000 longevity payment when he was only due $400.  Based on his own 
testimony, he questioned, at the time, whether the payment was made in error.  Yet, he failed to 
inform the Police Chief at the time, the Town Administrator, or any other Town official  about 
this overpayment or, at a minimum, his qu estion regarding whether the payment was made in 
error.  
    The issue of erroneous payment s continued when Town Meeting, in October 2017, voted to 
provide longevity payments to non -CBA personnel.  To implement this new benefit, the Town 
Administrator deleg ated the task to the HR Director.  The HR Director then delegated the task to 
the Assistant Human Resources Director, providing no guidance or oversight.  The resulting 
errors were inevitable.   One of those errors involved Lt. Lewandowski  who received a s econd 
longevity payment of $200 in October 2017.   Even if the 7/15/02 auxiliary start date applied and 
even if the time worked in Milbury was counted; and even if the employment did not need to be 
continuous, Lt. Lewandowski  would still have only been eli gible for a total payment of $200.  
The payment of an additional $200, for a total of $400 , was an error.  Like Chief Maxfield, 26 
 however, when he was a sergeant, Lt. Lewandowski  took no action to correct this error when it 
appeared in his pay invoice.  The Town went to painstaking efforts, both during the hearing and 
in its post -hearing brief to distinguish the two circumstances  up to that point .  In short, the Town 
argues that Chief Maxfield did not know that the $1,000 payment he received in July 2017  was 
an overpayment of $600, while Lt. Lewandowski  did know that the payment he received in 
October 2017 was an overpayment of $200.  This argument is not supported by the record.  As 
referenced above, Chief Maxfield knew that he had received an overpayment of $600, or , at a 
minimum, questioned whether it was an error, but did not alert Town officials.  
    What occurred next, however, did distinguish what occurred with Chief Maxfield from Lt. 
Lewandowski .  Chief Maxfield , at the time he received the overpayment, was not asked for an 
explanation regarding the overpayment he received.  In short, the error went unnoticed by Town 
officials  at the time .  The erroneous payment made to Lt. Lewandowski , however, was noticed 
when the Chief’s new administrative assistant wa s reviewing accounts in preparation for the 
following year’s budget submission.  Ironically, it was Chief Maxfield who asked Lt. 
Lewandowski  to explain why he ( Lt. Lewandowski ) had received  his overpayment.  I listened 
carefully to Lt. Lewandowski ’s testimony and reviewed his written responses to determine if he 
could offer a credible explanation as to why the second $200 payment was not an error and, if 
not, why he didn’t notify Town officials of the error.   He could not.  If Lt. Lewandowski  had 
simp ly acknowledged , at the time, that he, like others, had failed to notify Town officials of the 
overpayment , the matter likely would have been closed.  Instead, he offered non -responsive and 
vague answers that appeared designed to obfuscate and confuse thos e individuals, including the 
Police Chief, who were looking for a  valid  explanation.  27 
     The Town’s termination letter to Lt. Lewandowski , referring to the longevity payment, states 
in part:  “While you only pocketed $200, that alone would justify your dis missal.”   Given the 
glaring disparity regarding how the Town handled the overpayment received by Lt. 
Lewandowski  as opposed to others, including Chief Maxfield, this would not, standing alone, 
justify Lt. Lewandowski ’s termination, even when taking into a ccount his non -responsive and 
vague answers.  
    Unfortunately for Lt. Lewandowski , however, he ( Lt. Lewandowski ) subsequently took 
further  actions which called into question his honesty, as discussed below.  
Additional Week of Vacation  
     As referenced above, the Assistant HR Director, when calculating the longevity payment, 
listed 7/15/02 as Lt. Lewandowski ’s date of hire with the Town, as opposed to 9/27/05, when he 
was appointed as a full -time police officer.  Lt. Lewandowski  knew the difference betwe en the 
two dates and he knew that his employment as an auxiliary police officer with the Town ended 
on December 11, 2003.  Knowing that he only had twelve years of continuous service toward 
vacation credit, he asked the Assistant HR Director to credit him with an additional week of 
vacation time.  Even if I were to accept Lt. Lewandowski ’s argument, which I don’t, that he 
thought he did qualify for the additional vacation  credit , he still made an untruthful statement to 
the Police Chief.  When Chief Maxfiel d, prior to signing off on the additional week of vacation, 
expressly asked him whether he had been with the CPD for fifteen (15)  years, Lt. Lewandowski  
answered “Yes” when he knew the answer was “No.”  
Sick Leave Audit  
    The most troubling actions and statements by Lt. Lewandowski  related to the sick leave audit.  
The sequence of events is laid out in the findings.  Similar to how the new personnel bylaw 28 
 regarding longevity payment was implemented, much of the heavy li fting regarding sick time 
audits was relegated to administrative staff.  In this case, MP, the former administrative assistant 
in the Police Department, appeared to conduct a fairly comprehensive sick time audit, in which 
she examined all time accrued and all time used, including sick time usage that was only 
record ed manually in a book, prior to the Town’s moving to computerized tracking in 2008.   
     Using those audit figures as a starting point, the new administrative assistant, under the new 
Police Ch ief, provided all police department employees with an updated sick time balance and 
asked each employee to verify its accuracy.  Remarkably, Lt. Lewandowski , who had never 
questioned the conclusions of the prior audit, went back and conducted an audit of h is own time 
from his date of hire, failing to deduct any sick time usage between 2005 and 2008 that was 
entered manually  prior to the process being computerized.  Whether this falsely inflated his sick 
time by 160 or 274 hours is irrelevant.  Lt. Lewandows ki knew the inflated number could not be 
correct as it did not account for any of his sick time usage between the relevant time periods 
between 2005 and 2008 .  The upward adjustment to his sick time balance by the Town was based 
solely on Lt. Lewandowski ’s misrepresentation.  
As this appeal can be decided based on the above, I need not address whether Lt. 
Lewandowski  misrepresented what former Chief Pervier explicitly told him about his benefits 
as opposed to what Lt. Lewandowski  inferred from that discussi on.  Nor do I need to address 
whether Lt. Lewandowski  should have noticed that six vacation days he took over six different 
weeks were not deducted from his accrued time.  
     There is a disconnect between the person who appeared before me throughout the three days 
of hearing and the proven charges of untruthfulness here.   The Appellant is someone who has 
worked hard his entire life, including obtaining two masters’ degrees.  He has dedicated himself 29 
 to public service in his community; is proud of his family; and clearly enjoyed his job as 
second -in-command of the Town’s Police Department.   In that context, what happened here is 
tragic.  
     Rather than acknowledging that he received a second $200 longevity payment in error, Lt. 
Lewandowski  inexplicably opted for obfuscation over candor.  He then  made matters (much) 
worse for himself by knowingly using the same erroneous information that partly caused the 
overpayment to increase his vacation accrual from four to five weeks before such credit  was due 
to him.  When expressly asked by the Town’s Police Chief if he had been with the Charlton 
Police Department for fifteen years, he said “yes”.  The truthful answer was “no”.  Then, he did 
an audit of his own sick time and knowingly inflated his sic k time balance by failing to deduct 
sick time usage that was recorded manually between 2005 and 2008.   
     The Appellant couldn’t offer a credible explanation for his actions.  Perhaps the Appellant 
was trying to bolster his vacation and sick time balanc es because he was no longer eligible for a 
series of administrative days granted to him by the former Chief.  Perhaps  his actions were 
simply  a brief error in judgment for a person whose personal and professional life appears to 
have been conducted in an o therwise exemplary manner.  Had that error in judgment been 
limited to one instance, such as the $200 longevity payment, my conclusion would have been 
far different here.  However, as referenced above, the Appellant was untruthful regarding 
multiple matter s, including the above -referenced effort to increase his accrued vacation time and 
the erroneous inflation of his sick time balances.  Taken together, those multiple instances of 
proven untruthfulness constitute substantial misconduct adverse to the public  interest that 
provide just cause for the Town’s decision to discipline him.  
     Having determined that Lt. Lewandowski did engage in the alleged misconduct, I must  30 
 determine whether the level of discipline (termination) was warranted.       
     As stat ed by the SJC in Falmouth v. Civ. Serv. Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 -825 (2006):  
 
      “After making its de novo findings of fact, the commission must pass judgment  
on the penalty imposed by the appointing authority, a role to which the statute  
 speaks dire ctly.  G.L. c. [31], s. § 43 (‘The commission may also modify any  
 penalty imposed by the appointing authority.’)  Here the commission does  
 not act without regard to the previous decision of the [appointing authority],  
but rather decides whether ‘there  was reasonable justification for the action taken by  
the appointing authority in the circumstances found by the commission to have  
existed when the appointing authority made its decision.” Id. citing  Watertown v.  
Arria ,16 Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983).  
 
 “Such authority to review and amend the penalties of the many disparate  
 appointing authorities subject to its jurisdiction inherently promotes the  
 principle of uniformity and the ‘equitable treatment of similarly situated  
 individuals.’ citing Police  Comm’r of Boston v. Civ. Serv. Comm’n , 39 
 Mass.App.Ct. 594, 600 (1996).  However, in promoting these principles,  
 the commission cannot detach itself from the underlying purpose of the  
 civil service system — ‘to guard against political considerations, favoritism  
 and bias in governmental employment decisions.” Id. (citations omitted).  
 
 -- 
 
 “Unless the commission’s findings of fact differ significantly from those reported  
 by the town or interpret the relevant law in a substantially different way, the  
 absence of political considerations, favoritism or bias would warrant essentially  
 the same penalty.  The commission is not free to modify the penalty imposed by  
 the town on the basis of essentially similar fact finding without an adequate  
 explanati on.” Id. at 572. (citations omitted).  
 
    My findings do not differ significantly from the Town as I have found that the Appellant was 
untruthful on multiple occasion s.  As discussed above, I do not believe the investigation here 
was a pretext to bring ab out the Appellant’s termination .  Further, I don’t believe the final 
decision to terminate the Appellant was based on any personal or political bias.  Finally, 
although there is evidence that the Town treated other similarly situated individuals differentl y 
from the Appellant regarding receipt of the longevity payment, the record does not show that 31 
 those other employees engaged in multiple instances of untruthfulness, thus distinguishing them 
from the Appellant.  
     For all of the above reasons, the Appell ant’s appeal under Docket No. D1 -18-196 is hereby 
denied  and the Town’s decision to terminate his employment is affirmed.  
Civil Service Commission  
 
 
