NOTICE: Summary decisions  issued by the Appeals Court pursuant  to its rule 1:28, as
amended by 73 Mass. App. Ct. 1001 (2009), are primarily  directed  to the parties and,
therefore,  may not fully address the facts of the case or the panel's decisional
rationale. Moreover, such decisions  are not circulated  to the entire court and,
therefore,  represent  only the views of the panel that decided the case. A summary
decision  pursuant  to rule 1:28 issued after February  25, 2008, may be cited for its
persuasive  value but, because of the limitations  noted above, not as binding  precedent.
See Chace v. Curran, 71 Mass. App. Ct. 258, 260 n.4 (2008).
COMMONWEALTH  OF MASSACHUSETTS
APPEALS  COURT
16-P-269
EDWARD MCCORMACK -_
== ) = -<
DEPARTMENT  OF STATE POLICE & another.? . ea) -
MEMORANDUM  AND ORDER PURSUANT  TO RULE 1:28 = ° ie)
The plaintiff,  Edward  McCormack,  and the defendant,  the
Department  of State Police (department),  cross-appeal  from a
judgment  entered  on the pleadings.  A Superior  Court judge
affirmed  the decision  of the Civil Service Commission
(commission)  finding that the department  had established  just
cause to terminate  McCormack  from his position  as a State
trooper, but that he was nonetheless  entitled  to forty days of
back pay (representing  a portion  of the time that he had been
suspended  without  pay). McCormack  argues that the department
lacked just cause to terminate  him, and the department
challenges  the back pay order. We affirm.
1. Procedural  history. McCormack  graduated  from the State
Police Academy  and became a State trooper  in 2002. Based on
1 Civil Service  Commission.
allegations  that McCormack  had engaged  in prescription  drug
abuse and "doctor  shopping,"  the department  held a duty status
hearing  on April 3, 2008, and subsequently  suspended  him without
pay. On January  7, 2009, McCormack  was indicted  on eighteen
counts of obtaining  a false prescription  through  fraud and one
count of uttering  a false prescription.*  During the course of
the criminal  proceedings,  a Superior  Court judge suppressed
certain  prescription  drug records  which the State police had
seized without  a warrant. As a result, the Commonwealth  filed a
nolle prosequi  on seventeen  counts of the indictment;  after a
trial before a jury, McCormack  was acquitted  of the remaining
charges.  3
Once McCormack's  criminal  case was disposed  of, and as a
result of four separate  investigations  into his conduct  before
and after his suspension,  a State police trial board (board)
held a hearing  at which McCormack  was found to have committed
fifty-six  violations  of departmental  rules. The board submitted
its findings  and recommendations  on December  7, 2011, to Colonel
Timothy  Alben, who approved  the findings  and ordered  that
McCormack's  employment  be terminated  on November  6, 2012.
2 The department  held another  duty status hearing  on January  12,
2009, after which McCormack  remained  suspended.
2 In an unpublished  decision  pursuant  to our rule 1:28, McCormack
v. Department  of State Police, 86 Mass. App. Ct. 1113 (2014),
we upheld a Superior  Court judge's  decision  dismissing
McCormack's  claim for lost wages pursuant  to G. L. c. 30, § 59,
during the pendency  of his criminal  case.
McCormack  appealed  the board's  decision  to the commission
pursuant  to G. L. c. 31, §§ 41-45, and G. L. c. 22C, § 13; a de
novo evidentiary  hearing  was conducted  before a single
commissioner.
The commissioner  heard testimony  over the course of three
days from sixteen  witnesses  presented  by the department  and one
witness  presented  by McCormack.  For the most part, the
commissioner  credited  the testimony  of all the witnesses,  but
expressed  reservations  as to the testimony  of McCormack's  former
girl friend, finding  her testimony  only "relatively  reliable."
The commissioner  also drew a negative  inference  against
McCormack  based on his failure  to testify.
The commissioner  determined  that the department  had shown
just cause to discipline  McCormack  based upon some, but not all,
of the fifty-six  rule violations  found by the board. She
further determined  that the department  had established  just
cause for the termination,  but that it owed McCormack  forty days
of back pay.4 The commission  adopted  the commissioner's
findings. McCormack  then appealed  to the Superior  Court, where
4 The commissioner  found that the board lacked just cause to
impose (1) two concurrent  ten-day  unpaid suspensions  based on
allegations  that McCormack  took his former girl friend out of
State, in violation  of her probation,  and (2) two concurrent
thirty-day  unpaid suspensions  based on allegations  that
"McCormack  fraudulently  obtained  thousands  of controlled
substances"  which resulted  in his addiction  and in criminal
proceedings  against  him.
a judge affirmed  the commission's  decision. This appeal
followed.
2. Background.  The department  conducted  four
investigations  into McCormack's  conduct,  and the commissioner
found the following  facts.
a. First investigation.  The first investigation  involved
McCormack's  conduct  during traffic  stops conducted  on January  7
and January  28, 2010, when McCormack  was suspended  from his
position.
On January  7, McCormack  was pulled over for speeding  by
State Trooper  John Kiley. McCormack  showed Kiley what appeared
to be a State police badge and said, "Tim one of you guys."
Kiley permitted  McCormack  to leave without  citing him, but later
learned  that McCormack  was suspended  and that the badge may have
been a replica.
On January 28, McCormack  was stopped three times during the
early morning  hours. Yarmouth  police Officer  Scott Lundegren
conducted  the first stop for a traffic  violation.  McCormack
showed Officer  Lundegren  what appeared  to be a State police
badge. He explained  that he worked from "H-1" in Boston, that
he was going to "help someone  out," and was "just trying to save
a life," suggesting  that he was responding  to an emergency.
McCormack  was let go.
Shortly  thereafter,  McCormack  was stopped  by State Trooper
Thomas Fitzpatrick,  who was investigating  the theft of a badge
from a retired  State trooper (Fitzpatrick  had been contacted  by
Officer  Lundegren  after the prior stop); Fitzpatrick  suspected
that McCormack  might possess  the badge. McCormack  showed
Fitzpatrick  what appeared  to be a State police badge, and said
he did not have his police identification  with him.®
Fitzpatrick  was then joined by Lundegren.  McCormack  denied
being suspended,  but told the two officers  that he was on
medical leave for a back injury.
The third traffic  stop of the morning  was conducted  by Mary
Gibney, another  Yarmouth  police officer. She stopped  McCormack
for failing  to yield at a stop sign.® McCormack  told Officer
Gibney that he was a State trooper,  but omitted  saying that he
had been suspended.’  Gibney was soon joined by Fitzpatrick  and
Lundegren.  The three of them concluded  that McCormack's  badge
was a replica,  and Fitzpatrick  seized it.
5 During the second stop, McCormack  called someone  who identified
himself  as McCormack's  brother,  who was also a State trooper.
This person told Fitzpatrick  that McCormack  was suspended.
6 Officer  Gibney testified  that she was unaware  that McCormack
was the subject  of an investigation  into the stolen badge until
after she had stopped  him.
7 Officer  Gibney issued McCormack  citations  for failure  to yield
at a stop sign and failure  to change his address  with the
Registry  of Motor Vehicles. He appealed  the citations  and was
found not responsible.
Based upon the testimony  of these three police officers,
which the commissioner  credited,  the commissioner  found that the
department  had demonstrated  that McCormack  "acted in a manner as
to bring the State [p]lolice  in disrepute  and received  a
complaint  regarding  his conduct,"  failed to conform  to State and
Federal laws, and made untrue statements.  The commissioner
concluded  that the department  had just cause to terminate
McCormack.
b. Second investigation.  The second investigation
involved  McCormack's  relationship  with his former girl friend
(identified  as "Ms. A." in the commissioner's  decision)  and his
conduct  with various  officials  at the Barnstable  District  Court.
Ms. A. used heroin; during her relationship  with McCormack  she
had been arrested  and charged  with six counts of breaking  and
entering  into a property  with the intent to commit a felony.?®
She pleaded  guilty to the charges and was placed on probation.
While Ms. A. was on probation  and McCormack  was suspended,
McCormack  met with her probation  officer,’  the probation
officer's  supervisor,  and two community  corrections  coordinators
who were supervising  Ms. A. McCormack  identified  himself  as a
State trooper  in order to gain information  and obtain favorable
8 State police rules prohibit  associating  with persons  involved
in criminal  activity.
9 McCormack  also shouted  at the probation  officer, "You got your
wish," after she requested  that he not attend his girl friend's
probation  meetings.
influence  over Ms. A.'s probation.  McCormack  also allowed  Ms.
A. to be photographed  wearing  his State police badge.*® At some
point Ms. A. broke up with McCormack,  after which he threatened
her with criminal  prosecution  and the loss of custody  of her
child.?}
The commissioner  found that the department  had just cause
for disciplining  McCormack  based on violations  of several
department  rules, including  one that provides  that "[s]uspended
members shall be deprived  of all .. . State [p]olice  powers and
privileges  and must not represent  themselves  as members  of the
State [p]lolice."  The commissioner  found that this was
just cause for the department  to terminate  McCormack.
@. Third investigation.  The third investigation  involved
McCormack's  conduct  toward another  motorist  during a motor
vehicle  accident  that took place while McCormack  was suspended.
The commissioner  heard and credited  testimony  from Barnstable
police Officers  Jennifer  Ellis and Justin Waskiewicz,  who
responded  to the accident,  as well as State police Detective
Dana Pagley, who spoke with the other driver and with
McCormack's  insurance  company. McCormack  had identified  himself
10 From the record it appears  that this incident  occurred  before
McCormack  was suspended,  and thus that Ms. A. was wearing  his
real badge, not a replica.
11 Because  there was contradictory  evidence,  the commissioner
determined  that the department  lacked just cause to discipline
McCormack  for allegedly  taking Ms. A to New Hampshire,  in
violation  of the terms of her probation.
as a State trooper  to both the other motorist  and the responding
officers. He attempted  to intimidate  the other driver by using
his position  as a State trooper,  withheld  details  of the
accident  in order to hinder or delay the investigation,  and made
untrue statements.  The commissioner  found that the department
had just cause to discipline  McCormack  by imposing  suspension
without  pay.
ad. Fourth investigation.  The fourth investigation
involved  McCormack's  use of prescription  drugs and
misrepresentations  about his medical condition.  The department
alleged  that McCormack  provided  false information  when he was
applying  to the State police in 2001 and 2002 regarding  the
seriousness  of certain  back injuries  that he had sustained  in
1998 and 1999. The department  also alleged  that McCormack
unlawfully  used and possessed  controlled  substances  between  2007
and 2011. Ms. A. testified  that she and McCormack  took
oxycodone  together,  that she sold oxycontin  to McCormack,  that
she gave McCormack  suboxone  that had been prescribed  to her, and
that McCormack  gave her money to purchase  heroin and wanted her
"to shoot him up," but that she did not do so because  she
believed  that what she had purchased  was "no good."
McCormack  also obtained  hydrocodone  from his dentist
without revealing  that he was already  on prescription  pain
medications.  The dentist  testified  that, had he known that
McCormack  was already  on prescription  pain medication,  he would
not have prescribed  additional  pain medication.  However,
because  the majority  of McCormack's  pharmacy  records  were
suppressed  in the criminal  case, the commissioner  did not
consider  this information,!4  and found that the department  had
just cause to terminate  McCormack  only on the allegation  of his
misstating  his medical  condition.
3. Substantial  evidence. McCormack  contends  that the
commission's  findings  were not supported  by substantial
evidence,  as required  by G. L. c. 30A, § 14(7)(e). We disagree.
"A court reviewing  a decision  made by the commission  is 'bound
to accept the findings  of fact of the commission's  hearing
officer, if supported  by substantial  evidence.'"  Beverly  v.
Civil Serv. Commn., 78 Mass. App. Ct. 182, 188 (2010), quoting
from Leominster  v. Stratton,  58 Mass. App. Ct. 726, 728 (2003).
"Substantial  evidence"  is defined  in G. L. c. 30A, § 1(6), as
"such evidence  as a reasonable  mind might accept as adequate  to
support a conclusion."  "In order to be supported  by substantial
evidence,  an agency conclusion  need not be based upon the 'clear
weight' of the evidence  or even a preponderance  of the evidence,
but rather only upon ‘reasonable  evidence,’  .. . after taking
12 McCormack  contends  that he lacked notice that he was being
‘charged  with being untruthful  about his medical  condition  and
had insufficient  opportunity  to prepare. Because  he neither
made such a claim in his complaint  nor argued it to the Superior
Court judge, we decline  to consider  this argument.
into consideration  opposing  evidence  in the record." Lisbon v.
Contributory  Retirement  Appeal Bd., 41 Mass. App. Ct. 246, 257
(1996) (citations  omitted). "Under the substantial  evidence
test, a reviewing  court is not empowered  to make a de novo
determination  of the facts, to make different  credibility
choices, or to draw different  inferences  from the facts found by
the [commission]."  Medi-Cab  of Mass. Bay, Inc. v. Rate Setting
Commn., 401 Mass. 357, 369 (1987).
The commissioner  issued a comprehensive  and detailed
decision,  with 126 factual findings  and a lengthy  legal
analysis. "[I]t is for the agency, not the courts, to weigh the
credibility  of witnesses  and resolve factual disputes."  School
Comm. of Wellesley  v. Labor Relations  Commn., 376 Mass. 112, 120
(1978). Contrary  to McCormack's  assertions,  even though he was
acquitted  of criminal  charges  and found not responsible  on the
traffic  violations,  the department  could still discipline  him
for conduct  related  to those matters. "Police  officers  must
comport  themselves  in accordance  with the laws that they are
sworn to enforce  and behave in a manner that brings honor and
respect for rather than public distrust  of law enforcement
personnel.  They are required  to do more than refrain  from
indictable  conduct." Police Commr. of Boston v. Civil Service
Commn., 22 Mass. App. Ct. 364, 371 (1986). McCormack's  more
specific  challenges  to the evidence  are also unpersuasive.
10
a. Harassment.  McCormack  argues that because  the evidence
demonstrates  that he was "harassed  and targeted"  by law
enforcement  officials  who had concocted  a "plan to seize
McCormack's  badge," the department  has failed to show that he
was legitimately  stopped  for traffic  violations  on January  28,
2010. He challenges  the finding  that he violated  traffic laws
and the rules pertaining  to a trooper's  truthfulness.  This
assertion  lacks merit.
"The reviewing  court may not make new determinations  of
facts or make different  credibility  choices." Leominster  v.
Stratton,  supra at 733, citing Pyramid  Co. v. Architectural
Barriers  Bd., 403 Mass. 126, 130 (1988). Even assuming  that
there are "two fairly conflicting  views" of the evidence,  the
commission  is entitled  to choose how to interpret  the evidence
before it. Labor Relations  Commn. v. University  Hosp., Inc.,
359 Mass. 516, 521 (1971). Two local police officers  and one
State trooper  testified  as to McCormack's  traffic  violations  and
untruths,  and the commissioner  credited  their testimony.
b. Hearsay  evidence. McCormack  asserts  that several
findings  pertaining  to the incident  involving  a motor vehicle
accident  are not supported  by substantial  evidence  because the
department  failed to present  the testimony  of the other
motorist. This argument  is also unavailing.  "In administrative
proceedings,  hearsay  evidence  can be received  and may constitute
11
substantial  evidence  if it contains  sufficient  indicia  of
reliability  and probative  value." School Comm. of Brockton  v.
Massachusetts  Commn. Against  Discrimination,  423 Mass. 7, 15
(1996). The department  presented  the other motorist's
statements  through  reliable  hearsay. The police officer  who
spoke to the motorist  immediately  after the accident  testified
to the motorist's  statement,  and this testimony  was consistent
with other evidence.!3  We will not overturn  the commission's
findings  where, as here, the its reliance  on the evidence  was
not unreasonable.“  Ibid.
4. Back pay. The department  asserts  that the commission
exceeded  its authority  when it ordered  the department  to
compensate  McCormack  for forty days of back pay because  the
commission  may only authorize  back pay if an individual  is
returned  to his or her position.  In support  of this proposition,
the department  cites to G. L. c. 31, § 43, which states that
"{i]£ the commission  by a preponderance  of the evidence
determines  that there was just cause for an action taken against
13 MeCormack  also contends  that the department's  failure to
subpoena  the other motorist  violated  departmental  rules which
provide  him the right to cross-examine  adverse  witnesses.  See
Fisher v. Lint, 69 Mass. App. Ct. 360, 368 (2007). McCormack's
bare assertion  is unaccompanied  by citation  to legal authority,
and we have found none that suggest  the department  was compelled
to subpoena  the other driver.
4 To the extent that we have not addressed  the defendant's  other
contentions,  they "have not been overlooked.  We find nothing  in
them that requires  discussion."  Commonwealth  v. Domanski,  332
Mass. 66, 78 (1954).
12
[an aggrieved]  person it shall affirm the action of the
appointing  authority.  .. ." However,  the statute  continues  by
stating  that the commission  "may also modify any penalty  imposed
by the appointing  authority."  It is true that "[t]he commission
is not free to modify the penalty  imposed  by the [department]  on
the basis of essentially  similar  fact finding  without  an
adequate  explanation."  Falmouth  v. Civil Serv. Commn., 447
Mass. 814, 824 (2006) (citation  omitted). However,  here the
commission  made dissimilar  findings  and did not find just cause
for several  of the fifty-six  violations  found by the department.
Accordingly,  we discern  no error.
Judgment  affirmed.
By the Court (Vuono, Meade &ia  Jd. ys
a We Pan
Entered: August 14, 2017.
15 The panelists  are listed in order of seniority.
13
