COMMONWEALTH  OF MASSACHUSETTS
CIVIL  SERVICE  COMMISSION
SUFFOLK,  ss. One Ashburton  Place: Room  503
Boston,  MA 02108
(617) 727-2293
PATRICIA  MCGOLDRICK,
Appellant
v. D1-16-165
BOSTON  POLICE  DEPARTMENT,
Respondent
Appearance  for Appellant: William  Broderick,  Esq.
1194 High Street
Westwood,  MA 02090
Appearance  for Respondent  : Nicole  Taub,  Esq.
Office  of the Legal Advisor.
Boston  Police  Department
One Schroeder  Plaza
Boston,  MA 02120
Commissioner: Paul M. Stein
DECISION  ON RESPONDENT’S  REVISED  MOTION  FOR SUMMARY  DECISION
The Appellant,  Patricia  McGoldrick,  acting pursuant  to G.L.c.31,  $41-$43,  appealed  to the
Civil Service  Commission  (Commission),  asserting  that she was unlawfully  terminated  from her
position of Police Officer with the Boston Police Department  (BPD).' At the pre-hearing
conference  held on November  1, 2016, the BPD filed a Motion  to Dismiss  the appeal on the
grounds  that the Commission  lacked  jurisdiction  because  the Appellant  was not terminated  but
had voluntarily  resigned  and because  the appeal was untimely.  (Exh./) The Commission  took no
action on the motion and ordered an evidentiary  hearing on the factual issue of whether  the
Appellant  resigned  or was terminated.  (Procedural  Order 11/3/2016)  On December  28, 2016,
' The Standard  Adjudicatory  Rules of Practice and Procedure,  801 CMR 8§ 1.00, ef seg., apply to adjudications
before  the Commission  with G.L. c. 31, or any Commission  rules, taking  precedence.
1
BPD subsequently  filed a Motion  for Summary  Decision  that reiterated  its position  and further
alleged  that any dispute  over whether  the Appellant  resigned  or not was a matter  of contract  law
over which a judicial  forum,  but not the Commission,  had jurisdiction.  (Exh.2)  On January  19,
2017, the BPD filed a Revised Motion for Summary  Decision,  restating its position and
introducing  further  documents  on the issue of the resignation  and untimeliness.  (Exh.3)
On January  23, 2017, after hearing  argument  from counsel  on the pending  motions,  I took
further documentary  and testimonial  evidence  proffered  by the parties in support of, and in
opposition  to, the BPD’s motions. Nineteen  additional  exhibits  (Exh.4 through  Exh.22)  were
received  in evidence.  The Appellant  called one witness  and testified  on her own behalf.
FINDINGS  OF FACT
Based on the submissions  of the parties, including  all documents,  affidavits,  memoranda,
exhibits  and testimony,  I find the following  material  facts are not in dispute:
1. The Appellant,  Patricia  McGoldrick,  who began as a BPD Police Cadet in 1987, was
appointed  as a BPD Police Officer in 1991. Since December  2008, Officer McGoldrick  was
assigned  to the BAT/Firearms  Licensing  Unit at BPD Headquarters  where she was tasked with
conducting  background  investigations  of applicants  seeking  Firearms  Licenses  from the BPD.
She is a member  of the Boston  Police  Patrolman’s  Association.  (BPPA).  (Exh. 3 [BPD’s  Revised
Motion, Exh.12];  Testimony  of Appellant)”
2. Until the incident  which led to this appeal, Officer McGoldrick  had never been the
subject of formal disciplinary  action by the BPD. (£xh.3 [BPD’s Revised  Motion, Exh.12];
Testimony  of Appellant)
* Officer  McGoldrick  was not required  to carry a firearm,  and typically  did not carry a firearm,  incident  to her duties
with the Firearms  Licensing  Unit. She did carry a firearm  while performing  details and, on occasion,  including  on
the day of the incident  involved  in this appeal,  brought  her firearm  to work after finishing  the detail. (Exh. 6)
2
3. On November  12, 2015, the BPD Internal Affairs Division (IAD) opened an
administrative  investigation  of an on-duty confrontation  between Officer McGoldrick  and
another  Police Officer. Pending  completion  of the investigation,  Officer  McGoldrick  was placed
on administrative  leave and required  to surrender  her firearm. (Exh.3 [BPD’s  Revised  Motion,
Exh.12],  Exhs.12  & 13; Testimony  of Appellant)
4. On November  20, 2015, Appellant  was interviewed  by IAD. (Exh.3 [BPD’s  Revised
Motion,  Exhs. 2 & 12])
5. Effective  December  14, 2015, Officer McGoldrick  was released  from Administrative
Leave and returned  to full duty with the Licensing  Unit. (Exh.3/BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.12],
Exh.15;  Testimony  of Appellant)
6. On or about March 2, 2016, BPPA President  Patrick  Rose learned  that the investigation
into the November  12, 2015 incident  was being reopened.  He understood  the reason for this
action was taken because  the Police Commissioner  had concluded  that Officer McGoldrick’s
behavior  could be considered  “felonious  misconduct”  that would warrant  termination.  Upon
learning  of this development,  BPPA  President  Rose became  upset and attempted  to argue that the
“Department  has it wrong” because there was no factual or legal basis to find Officer
McGoldrick  had any “criminal  intent” that would be required  to establish  a charge of criminal
assault. His argument  did not succeed.  (Exh. 5; Testimony  of Rose)
7. On March 3, 2016, pursuant  to Commissioner  Evans’ orders, Officer  McGoldrick  was
again relieved from duty and returned  to paid administrative  leave status, pending further
investigation  of the November  12, 2015 incident.  (Exh.3  [BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.12],  Exhs
5 & 16; Testimony  of Appellant)
8. By e-mail letter dated March 9, 2016, the attorney who then represented  Officer
McGoldrick  (legal counsel retained  by the BPPA to represent  its members),  wrote to Police
Commissioner  Evans.  The letter requested  a meeting  to plead Officer  McGoldrick’s  case directly
to the Police  Commissioner  and stated,  in part:
“.. . Officer  McGoldrick  had a brief  but very serious  lapse of judgment  on November  12,
2015 when she removed  her firearm  from her holster and, according  to two witnesses
raised this firearm  in the direction  of [another  BPD officer] after [that officer] made a
snide comment  regarding  Ms. McGoldrick’s  ex-husband. Officer McGoldrick  was
wrong  and is well-aware  of the severity  of her actions.  . . .”
(Exh.6)
9. The attorney’s  letter went on to take issue with what he characterized  as the BPD’s
expected  application  of a “litmus  test” that requires  termination  of any officer who engaged  in
“felonious  conduct”,  whether  or not ever convicted,  as both legally improper  and factually
flawed as applied  to Officer  McGoldrick,  who had consistently  explained  that she intended  her
actions solely as a “joke”. The letter also pointed to extenuating  circumstances  in Officer
McGoldrick’s  case, including  her long BPD career and her recent divorce  which left her as a
single mother  to care for three children,  two of whom  have disabilities.  (Exhs.6  & 16)
10. Through  several  email exchanges,  Amy Condon,  BPD’s Legal Advisor,  informed  Officer
McGoldrick’s  attorney  that communications  from him must be directed  to her or to another
member  of the Legal Advisor’s  staff. She offered  to meet with the attorney,  stating that while
“termination  is certainly  on the table”, the Police Commissioner  “is not trying to pre-determine
an outcome,  but to be up front about where he is on any given matter,  and set exceptions  [sic].”
She also noted that other officers who faced termination  had “chosen  to resign/retire”  and
“To]bviously  that is the best case scenario  to avoid unnecessary  litigation.”  (Exh. 7)
11. On May 9, 2016, the IAD sustained  the complaint  and promulgated  Specifications  against
Officer McGoldrick  charging her with violation of BPD Rules 102,84(Unreasonable
4
Judgment),102,$23  (Untruthfulness),  102,835 (Conformance  to Laws) and 303,$5 (Pointing
Firearms).  Exh.3 [BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exhs. I & 2])
12. By letter dated June 28, 2016, Police Commissioner  Evans informed  Officer  McGoldrick
that a disciplinary  hearing on the charges against her would be held before Deputy
Superintendent  Lydon  on July 20, 2016. (Exh.3/BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.3])
13. Some time prior to the disciplinary  hearing,  counsel  for the BPD and Officer  McGoldrick
negotiated  an agreement  that would allow Ms. McGoldrick  to resign and retire from the BPD in
lieu of proceeding  with the disciplinary  process. Officer  McGoldrick  wanted  a future effective
date in January  2017 to give her additional  retirement  credit, but the Department  insisted  on an
effective  date no later than October  |, 2016. After thinking  it over, Ms. McGoldrick  acquiesced.
(Exh.3  [BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.4];  Testimony  of Appellant  & Rose)
14. On July 18, 2018, Officer  McGoldrick  hand-delivered  a letter to BPD, which stated:
“This correspondence  is to notify you that effective  October  1, 2016, I am resigning
from my position  as a Police  Officer  with the Boston  Police  Department”
(Exh.3  [BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.6],  Exh. 8; Testimony  of Appellant)
15. By notice dated July 19, 2016, the disciplinary  hearing  on the charges  pending  against
Officer  McGoldrick  was cancelled.  (Exh.3[BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.5])
16. Police  Commissioner’s  Personnel  Order PO 16-232, dated September  12, 2016 and
published  on or about October  12, 2016, states:
“The resignation  of Police Officer Patricia McGoldrick,  ID# ------ assigned to
BAT/Administrative  Leave Section Org. #36134 after being presented  is hereby
accepted  with charges  pending  effective,  Saturday,  October  |, 2016.”
(Exhs.4 & 18)
> At the Commission  hearing, the Appellant  contended  that the numerical  sequencing  of PO 16-232 and other
Personnel  Orders,  suggested  that PO 16-232  was actually  back-dated  on or about October  12, 2016, after the dispute
over the resignation  which is the subject  of this appeal had arisen. Although  there are some inconsistencies  in the
numerical  sequencing  of POs, issue dates,  and effective  dates of the actions  described  in the respective  POs, nothing
in the evidence  presented  implies  that PO 16-232  or any other PO was not issued by the BPD in the ordinary  course
of business.  (Exhs. 4, 18 & 19)
17. On September  23, 2016, after communicating  a “heads up” with BPD’s Legal Advisor,
Officer  McGoldrick’s  attorney  sent a letter to her, copied to BPPA President  Rose and Officer
McGoldrick,  which states:
“T am writing  to you asking  that the July 18, 2016 resignation  of Officer  McGoldrick
which becomes  effective  on October  1, 2016 be rescinded  at Officer  McGoldrick’s
request. She is aware that rescinding  this resignation  will result in the rescheduling  of
her Departmental  trial board, and has requested  that we withdraw  and rescind her
resignation  that is slated  to become  effective  on October  1, 2016.”
(Exh.3  [BPD  ’s Revised  Motion,  Exh.9],  Exh. 10)
18. On September  27, 2016, BPD Superintendent  Kevin Buckley  informed  BPPA President
Rose that Police Commissioner  Evans was not inclined  to accept Officer  McGoldrick’s  request
to revoke her resignation.  BBPA President  Rose, in turn, informed  Officer McGoldricks’s
attorney  to that effect. (Exh.3/BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.9];  Testimony  of Rose)
19.On September  28, 2016, after communicating  by email with the BPD Legal Advisor,
Officer  McGoldrick’s  attorney  informed  her by e-mail:
“Both Pat and I have spoken  to the Department,  with Pat speaking  to Superintendent
Buckley  and myself  speaking  to Attorney  Amy Ambarik  [Condon].  They have both
advised — that Commissioner  Evans is not going to let you rescind  your resignation.”
(Exh.3  [BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.9],  Exh.20)
20. Also, on or about September  28, 2016, the BPD sent an “Absence  and Termination
Notice/Form  56” to the Massachusetts  Human  Resources  Division  (HRD),  which HRD received
on October  3, 2016, which informed  HRD that Officer  McGoldrick  had resigned,  with charges
pending,  effective  October  1, 2016. (Exhs.11  & 17)
21. By email on September  30, 2016, in response  to Officer  McGoldrick’s  correspondence
the day before,  the attorney  who had represented  her informed  her that the BPPA  could no longer
represent  her interests but, should she wish to challenge  the BPD’s refusal to accept the
withdrawal  of her resignation,  that she was free to do so individually.  (Exh. 21)
22.By email and letter dated October  2, 2016, Ms. McGoldrick  wrote to BPPA President
Rose and, among other things, requested  that the BPPA “commence  the necessary  actions to
appeal the City’s unlawful  termination  of my employment  as a Boston Police Officer.  As this
case involves  matters outside Attorney  Anderson’s  expertise,  please arrange for representation
by a firm specializing  in administrative  and employment  law.” (Exh. 22)
23.By letter dated October 7, 2016 to Police Commissioner  Evans, Ms. McGoldrick
demanded  a written reply to her attorney’s  September  23, 2016 letter that asked that her
resignation  be rescinded.  (Exh.3  [BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.10])
24. On October  12, 2016, BPD’s  Director  of Human  Resources,  replied  as follows:
“Your letter dated October 7, 2016 requesting  the Police Commissioner  to rescind his
acceptance  of your resignation  has been received.  As your attorney ... relayed  to you, the
Police Commissioner  accepted your resignation  upon receipt, and you are therefore
considered  resigned  from your position  as of October  1, 2016.”
(Exh.3  [BPD’s  Revised  Motion,  Exh.10])
25.On October  17, 2016, Ms. McGoldrick  filed this appeal. She stated as grounds  for her
appeal that she had agreed to resign after being “subjected  to numerous  threats from [Police
Commissioner]  Evans of being stripped  of my retirement  rights” and, upon learning  on or about
September  22, 2016 that “my retirement  was not in jeopardy,  I rescinded  my resignation  in
writing.”  At the Pre-Hearing  Conference  in this appeal,  Ms. McGoldrick,  through  new counsel,
contended  that she resigned  believing  she was in “criminal  jeopardy  with the consequence  of
losing  her retirement  rights.”  (Claim  of Appeal;  Exh.3 [BPD  ’s Revised  Motion,  Exhs.11  & 12])
26. BPD supported  its Revised  Motion  to Dismiss  with numerous  affidavits  from every BPD
officer or attorney  with any involvement  in Ms. McGoldrick’s  case, all of whom expressly
denied making any threats to seek to charge Ms. McGoldrick  criminally  or to coerce her
resignation.  (See Exh.3[  BPD Revise  Motion,Exhs.13  through  25], Exh. 21). At the Commission
hearing,  the Appellant  did not proffer  any direct evidence  of any specific  threat or identify  any
particular  BPD officer or attorney  who allegedly  made such threats or attempted  to coerce her
into resigning,  save for vague, mostly  totem pole hearsay  about what she and BPPA President
heard that unknown  persons  were saying on the “Fourth  Floor” [where BPD Command  Staff is
located].  (Testimony  of Appellant  & Rose)
STANDARD  OF REVIEW
An appeal before the Commission  may be disposed  of summarily,  in whole or in part,
pursuant  to 801 C.M.R. 1.01(7)(g)  and 801 C.M.R.1.01(7)  (h) when, as a matter of law, the
undisputed  material  facts affirmatively  demonstrate  that there is “no reasonable  expectation”  that
a party can prevail on at least one “essential  element  of the case”. See, e.g., Milliken  & Co., v.
Duro Textiles LLC, 451 Mass. 547, 550, fn.6, (2008); Maimonides  School v. Coles, 71
Mass.App.Ct.  240, 249 (2008);  Lydon  v. Massachusetts  Parole  Board, 18 MCSR  216 (2005)
APPLICABLE  CIVIL  SERVICE  LAW
The Commission’s  jurisdiction  over appeals  by employees  “discharged,  removed  . . .[or] laid
off” in violation  of civil service  law comes  within  G.L.c.31,§42,  which  provides,  in relevant  part:
“Any person who alleges that an appointing  authority  has failed to follow the
requirements  of section forty-one  [requiring  prior notice and hearing|  in taking action
which has affected his employment  or compensation  may file a complaint  with the
commission.  Such complaint  must be filed within ten days, exclusive  of Saturdays,
Sundays  and legal holidays,  after said action has been taken, or after such person first
knew or had reason  to know of said action,  and shall set forth specifically  in what manner
the appointing  authority  has failed to follow said requirements.  If the commission  finds
that the appointing  authority  has failed to follow said requirements  and that the rights of
said person have been prejudiced  thereby,  the commission  shall order the appointing
authority to restore said person to his employment  immediately  without loss of
compensation  or other rights.”
“A person who files a complaint  under this section  may at the same time request  a
hearing  as to whether  there was just cause for the action of the appointing  authority  in the
same manner  as if he were a person aggrieved  by a decision  of an appointing  authority
made pursuant  to all the requirements  of section  forty-one.  .. .”
The ten-day  filing deadline  is jurisdictional  and must be strictly  enforced.  See, e.g., Town of
Falmouth  v. Civil Service  Comm’n,  64 Mass.App.Ct.  606, 608-609  (2005),  rev’d other grounds,
447 Mass.814  (2006);  Poore v. City of Haverhill,  29 MCSR  260 (2016);  Stacy v. Department  of
Developmental  Services,  29 MCSR 164 (2016); Volpicelli  v. City of Woburn,  22 MCSR  448
(2009);  Williamson  v. Department  of Transitional  Assistance,  22 MCSR  436 (2009).
The Commission  also consistently  holds that a civil service  employee  who voluntarily  choses
to resign employment  is not entitled to the benefits of notice and hearing under G.L.c31,
Sections  41, and has no right to appeal to the Commission  under Sections  42 or 43, even though
the resignation  was prompted  by impending  discipline  or discharge  of the employee,  unless the
employee  establishes  that the resignation  was induced  by fraud, coercion  or duress. See, e.g.,
Spencer  v. Massachusetts  Dep’t of Correction,  28 MCSR  592 (2015) and cases cited, aff'd sub
nom Spencer  v. Civil Service  Comm’n,  Suffolk  CV2015-03723  (Sup.Ct.  2016), appeal pending,
2016-P-1455;  cf. Walsh v. City of Worcester,  24 MCSR  234 (2011), aff'd, Worcester  CV2011-
00978 (2012)  (Commission  found that appellant,  in fact, did not resign)
ANALYSIS
The applicable  law and the undisputed  facts establish  two grounds  upon which the BPD’s
Revised Motion for Summary  Decision  must be granted and this appeal dismissed:  (1) the
Commission  lacks jurisdiction  to accept  the appeal as it was untimely;  and (2) Ms. McGoldrick
has failed to establish  any “reasonable  expectation”  that the BPD violated  any of her civil service
rights by accepting  her voluntary  resignation.
The Appeal  is Untimely.
Whether  Ms. McGoldrick’s  October 17, 2016 appeal to the Commission  is timely or not
turns on the date on which she first “knew or should have known”  of the BPD’s illegal act(s)
which she now alleges have infringed  her civil service rights.
triggered  the ten-day  period to appeal is October  |, 2016 or later, her appeal is timely; if the
applicable  trigger date is prior to October  1, 2016, the appeal is untimely.  *
The undisputed  facts establish  the following  timeline  of events:
BPD contends  that the ten-day  window  to appeal to the Commission  began on July 18, 2016,
when Officer McGoldrick  submitted  the letter of resignation  that she now contends was
unlawfully  procured. Ms. McGoldrick  contends  that the ten-day  window  began on October  7,July 18,2016 —
July 19, 2016 —
Sept. 23, 2016 —
Sept 27, 2016 —
Sept. 28, 2016 —
Sept. 30, 2016 —
Oct.1,2016  —-
Oct.2,2016  —-
Oct.3,2016  —-
Oct.7,2016  —
Oct. 12,2016  —Officer McGoldrick  submits a letter of resignation,  effective
October 1, 2016
Disciplinary  hearing  on charges  against  Officer  McGoldrick  is
cancelled
Officer  McGoldrick’s  attorney  asks that her resignation  be
rescinded
Officer  McGoldrick’s  attorney  learns from BPPA  President
Rose that BPD Superintendent  Buckley  informed  Rose that the
BPD was not inclined  to rescind  her resignation
Officer McGoldrick’s  attorney  confirms  with the BPD Legal
Advisor  that the information  he received  from BPPA  President
Rose was correct  and the attorney  informs  Officer  McGoldrick
by email that “Commissioner  Evans is not going to let you
rescind  your resignation.”
Officer  McGoldrick’s  attorney  informs  her that neither  he nor
the BPPA  will continue  to represent  her
Effective  date of Ms. McGoldrick’s  July 1, 2018 resignation
Ms. McGoldrick  demands  that BPPA  retain new counsel  to
represent  her
HRD received  a Form 56 from BPD, dated September  28,
2016, reciting  that Officer  McGoldrick  had resigned,  effective
October  1, 2016, with “charges  pending”.
Ms. McGoldrick  writes to BPD requesting  a response  to her
attorney’s  September  23, 2016 letter
BPD responds  to Ms. McGoldrick’s  Oct. 7, 2016 letter reciting
that BPD had accepted  her resignation  “upon receipt”  and
considered  her resigned  as of October  1, 2016. BPD publishes
PO 16-232,  dated Sept. 12, 2016, reciting  that Police
Commissioner  Evans has “hereby  accepted”  Officer
McGoldrick’s  resignation  with “charges  pending.”
* October 1, 2016, being a Saturday,  and October  10, 2016 being a legal holiday  (Columbus  Day), the tenth business
day after October  |, 2016 was October  17, 2016.
10If the applicable  date that
2016, when BPD confirmed  in writing  that her resignation  would  not be rescinded.  Alternatively,
Ms. McGoldrick  suggests  that the trigger date cannot be earlier than the effective  date of her
resignation,  i.e. October  |, 2016. For the reasons  explained  below,  I conclude  that none of these
dates are the applicable  trigger.  Rather,  the undisputed  evidence  establishes  that Ms. McGoldrick
“knew or should  have known”  of the BPD’s alleged  illegal acts of which she now complains  by
September  23, 2016 (as to the BPD’s alleged illegal coercion of her resignation)  and by
September  28, 2016 (as to the BPD’s alleged  illegal refusal to rescind  the resignation).  As Ms.
McGoldrick’s  appeal was filed more than ten days after she was placed on notice of her claim,
the appeal  is untimely  and must be dismissed  for lack of jurisdiction.
First, as to Ms. McGoldrick’s  claim that her July 18, 2016 resignation  was unlawfully
procured  by fraud, coercion  or duress, the BPD argues that she knew of that claim when she
resigned  and her right to claim that the resignation  was “involuntary”  expired  ten business  days
thereafter. That argument  does have some force, but it also seems logically  untenable  to
presume  that an employee  who, by definition,  was allegedly  unlawfully  coerced  into resigning
must simultaneously  be deemed  to know that she has the legal right to challenge  the resignation
and be able to act within ten days in order to preserve  her rights to a hearing before the
Commission.  In this case, however,  I do not need to decide  whether  the trigger  began on July 18,
2016, as the undisputed  facts indicate  that Ms. McGoldrick  did act to assert her claim that her
resignation  was unlawfully  procured  when she realized  (on September  22, 2016, she said) that an
unfavorable  outcome  of the pending  disciplinary  charges  would not, in fact, put her retirement
“in jeopardy”  as she claimed  BPD had told her. Armed  with this information,  on September  23,
2016, she sought  to exercise  her right to rescind  the resignation  and agreed to proceed  with the
disciplinary  process  on the charges  that had been asserted  against  her. Thus, it is not disputed
11
that the force of the prior coercion,  fraud or duress under which she alleges  that she suffered,  if
any, and which led to her resignation,  had dissipated  by September  23, 2016. I conclude  that
date is the point at which it cannot  be disputed  that she was on notice of the claim she has now
asserted  and had the capacity  and, therefore,  the statutory  duty, to act accordingly  to preserve  her
right to appeal  to the Commission  within  ten business  days thereafter.
Second,  to the extent  that Ms. McGoldrick  alleges  that the BPD acted unlawfully  under civil
service  law by refusing  to accept the rescission  of her resignation,  I conclude  that she knew or
should have known of that allegedly  unlawful  act no later than September  28, 2016, when she
was unequivocally  informed that BPD would not rescind the resignation. [I am  _ not
unsympathetic  to the plight  in which she then found herself,  with her union and attorney  advising
her that it was futile to pursue her claims,  leaving  her to find new counsel  on short notice, but
those circumstances  cannot override  the jurisdictional  requirement  to take immediate  action to
preserve  her rights, if any, to an administrative  appeal to the Commission.  That is a statutory
mandate  that the Commission  cannot override.
The Appellant  Showed  No “Reasonable  Expectation”  of Proving  a Coerced  Resignation.
Although  this appeal must be dismissed  as untimely,  it bears notice that, as to the underlying
merits of Ms. McGoldrick’s  contention  that her resignation  was “involuntary”,  she proffered  no
credible  evidence  that presented  any material  disputed  issue of fact on that issue. In support  of
its Revised  Motion  for Summary  Decision,  the BPD proffered  substantial  evidence,  including  ten
> It should be noted that, in contrast  to the short limitations  period established  for appeal to the Commission,  which,
standing  alone, may seem draconian  as applied  to a case such as the present  one, the legislature  also provided  a
longer,  and less stringent  rule for bringing  a civil action for these same violations,  as an alternative  to administrative
appeal to the Commission,  which statute  prescribes  a six-month  limitations  on such judicial  proceedings  and (unlike
the administrative  appeal statutes)  expressly  authorizes  the supreme  judicial  court and the superior  court to extend
even further  the time to bring such a civil action “for good cause shown.”  G.L.c.31,§42,93.  See generally,  Jamieson
v. Department  of Correction,  91 Mass.App.Ct.  1108 (Rule 1:28) (2017),  citing Mello v. Mayor of Fall River, 22
Mass.App.Ct.  974, rev.den.  398 Mass. 1104 (1986)
12
sworn affidavits  from the Police Commissioner  and nine other BPD personnel  known to have
had contact  with Officer  McGoldrick  during  the investigation  of the November  12, 2015 incident
and the circumstances  leading  up to her resignation  on July 18, 2016. Each of these affidavits
expressly  assert that, at no time did the affiant ever threaten  Officer  McGoldrick  with criminal
charges  or make threats or any statements  of a coercive  nature to induce her to resign. Neither
Ms. McGoldrick  nor BPPA President  Rose could offer any percipient  source of evidence  that
any of these affiants,  or any other BPD personnel,  made such threats  or coercive  statements.
Viewing  the record most favorably  to Ms. McGoldrick,  she was aware only of unattributed
impressions  and advice received through her BPPA representative,  her counsel, or other
unidentified  third party sources,  to the effect that someone  heard someone  on the “Fourth  Floor”
(Command  Staff Offices)  say something  that Ms. McGoldrick  construed  “in her mind” to mean
that, if she fought  her termination  and went through  with her “trial board” (disciplinary  hearing),
BPD would then also pursue “criminal  charges”  against  her. Nowhere  from the documentation
or testimony  proffered  by Ms. McGoldrick  or President  Rose does any remote  indicia  emerge  of
admissible  evidence,  or any basis upon which any inference  could be drawn,  that anyone  at BPD
actually threatened  to prosecute  Ms. McGoldrick  for any crime or attempted  to tie her
resignation  to the possibility  of prosecution.  The latter, of course, could, itself constitute  a
criminal  offense.
Rather, the evidence,  construed  favorably  to Ms. McGoldrick,  poins solely to the BPD’s
intent to reopen  the disciplinary  investigation  based on the view of the Police  Commissioner  that
her inappropriate  use of her firearm  (“felonious  misconduct’)  and the apparent  discrepancies  in
her statements  to investigators  (untruthfulness)  were both infractions  of BPD rules for which the
BPD followed  a zero tolerance  that requires  termination.  The BPPA tried, unsuccessfully  to
13
argue that the BPD “got it wrong”,  but, eventually  concluded  it was futile to expect  that the BPD
would be persuaded  otherwise,  so advised  Officer  McGoldrick  and, after thinking  it over, she
accepted  the BPD’s offer to let her resign. Neither  Ms. McGoldrick  nor BPPA President  Rose
proffered  any facts to controvert  sworn statements  of BPD officials  with percipient  knowledge  of
the colloquy  between  or among the BPPA, the BPD and Officer McGoldrick  regarding  he
pending  disciplinary  “charges”  which they asserted  never strayed  into the illegitimate  realm of
threatening  use of the criminal  justice  system  in any way to induce  her resignation.
Similarly,  viewing  the evidence  in the light most favorable  to Ms. McGoldrick,  she has no
reasonable  expectation  to prove that her resignation  was the result of the BPD’s leading  her to
believe  that, whether  or not she was actually  charged  criminally,  if she went through  with the
disciplinary  proceedings  and that resulted  in a termination,  her retirement  would  be “in jeopardy”
solely  for that reason. She named  no BPD official  as the source  of that conclusion,  and proffered
no evidence  of any specific  statement  that “they” made to that effect. As Ms. McGoldrick  now
agrees, such conclusion  was legally untenable.  See, e.g., G.L.c.31,850;  G.L.c.32,$15.  Her
alleged  initial mistaken  legal conclusion,  if any, does not rise to the level of creating  a bona fide
issue of disputed  fact necessary  to establish  an involuntary  resignation  due to fraud, coercion  or
duress,  as required  under applicable  civil service  law.°
BPD’s  Other Grounds  for Dismissal
BPD also asserted  that Ms. McGoldrick’s  appeal should  be dismissed  because  the questions
of whether  or not she had voluntarily  resigned  and/or  whether  or not BPD was required  to accept
the rescission  of her resignation  raised issues of contract  law that were beyond  the scope of the
Commission’s  jurisdiction  and are solely for resolution  in a judicial forum. I note that the
° Indeed,  at all times relevant,  Ms. McGoldrick  was represented  by competent  legal counsel,  which makes further
dubious  that she was actually  induced  to resign  due to an erroneous  legal conclusion.
14
Commission  has consistently  accepted  jurisdiction  to adjudicate  whether a resignation  was
“voluntary”  or “involuntary”  as an essential  corollary  to its authority  under civil service law to
protect  public employees  from unlawful  terminations.  See, e.g., Spencer  v. Massachusetts  Dep’t
of Correction,  28 MCSR 592 (2015) and cases cited, aff'd sub nom Spencer  v. Civil Service
Comm'n,  Suffolk CV2015-03723  (Sup.Ct.  2016), appeal pending,  2016-P-1455;  cf. Walsh v.
City of Worcester,  24 MCSR  234 (2011),  aff'd, Worcester  CV2011-00978  (2012) (Commission
found that appellant,  in fact, did not voluntarily  resign).  See also Mello v. Mayor  of Fall River,
22 Mass.App.Ct.  974, rev.den.,  398 Mass. 1104 (1986) (court gives City’s description  of
employee’s  “voluntary  termination”  no “talismanic  effect ... and treat the termination  of the
plaintiff's  employment  as a “discharge”  within  the meaning  of G.L.c.31,§41”);  Small v. Town of
Wakefield,  1995 WL 429952 (Middlesex  Sup. 1995) (Section  42 claim for refusal to return
employee  to duty)
I am not aware, however,  of any prior Commission  decision  or judicial precedent  on the
question  of a rescission  of an otherwise  voluntary,  prospective  resignation,  which may raise
separate  issues of fact in this particular  case, or any precedent  addressing  the Commission’s
concurrent  jurisdiction  (as opposed  to exclusive  judicial  jurisdiction)  of that issue. See generally,
Sinkevich  v. School Comm.  of Raynham,  403 Mass. 420 (1988) (rejecting  recession  of teacher’s
resignation);  Warner  v. Selectmen  of Amherst,  326 Mass. 435 (1950)  (fire chief's  “withdrawal  of
offer to resign”  ineffective);  Galluccio  v. Commissioner  of Labor & Indus., 4 Mass.App.Ct.  864
(1976) (rescission  ineffective);  Jones _v. Town of Wayland,  4 Mass.App.Ct.  725 (1976
(termination  effective  upon acceptance)  In view of the conclusion  to dismiss  the appeal for the
two reasons  explained  above,  it is not necessary  to address  the BPD’s additional  contentions  in
this Decision.
15
Finally,  the Decision  in this appeal is limited  to the two jurisdictional  issues addressed  above.
The Decision  does not reach the merits of Ms. McGoldrick’s  (strenuously  disputed)  contention
that she was targeted  for termination  without  “just cause” because  of alleged  personal  animus
against her (that she attributes  to her “whistle-blowing”  activities  over the years), which is
beyond  the scope of the present  motion. The Decision  concludes  only that the Commission  lacks
jurisdiction  over this appeal due to untimeliness  and lack of a sufficient  factual  basis to find that
Ms. McGoldrick’s  July 18, 2016 resignation  was a result of coercion,  fraud, duress,  which are
statutory  prerequisites  to allow her appeal  for alleged  unlawful  discharge  of employment.
CONCLUSION
Accordingly,  for the reasons stated, the BPD’s Motion for Summary  Disposition  is
GRANTED  on the issue of untimeliness.  The appeal of the Appellant,  Patricia  McGoldrick,
under Docket  No. G1-16-165  is dismissed.
Civil Service  Commission
/s/ Paul M. Stein
Paul M. Stein
Commissioner
By vote of the Civil Service Commission  (Bowman,  Chairman;  Camuso,  Ittleman,  Stein &
Tivnan,  Commissioners)  on March  30, 2017.
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration  within ten days of the receipt of this Commission  order or
decision.  Under the pertinent  provisions  of the Code of Mass. Regulations,  801 CMR 1.01(7)(I),  the motion  must
identify  a clerical or mechanical  error in this order or decision  or a significant  factor the Agency  or the Presiding
Officer may have overlooked  in deciding  the case. A motion for reconsideration  does not toll the statutorily
prescribed  thirty-day  time limit for seeking  judicial  review  of this Commission  order or decision.
Under the provisions  of G.L c. 31, § 44, any party aggrieved  by a final decision  or order of the Commission  may
initiate  proceedings  for judicial  review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior  court within thirty (30) days after
receipt  of such order or decision. Commencement  of such proceeding  shall not, unless specifically  ordered  by the
court, operate  as a stay of the Commission’s  order or decision. After initiating  proceedings  for judicial  review in
Superior  Court, the plaintiff,  or his / her attorney,  is required  to serve a copy of the summons  and complaint  upon
the Boston  office of the Attorney  General  of the Commonwealth,  with a copy to the Civil Service  Commission,  in
the time and in the manner  prescribed  by Mass. R. Civ. P. 4(d).
Notice  to:
William  Broderick,  Esq. (Appellant)
Nicole  Taub,  Esq. (for Respondent)
16
