1 
 COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
 
SUFFOLK, ss .     CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
       One Ashburton Place: Room 503  
       Boston, MA 02108  
       (617) 727 -2293  
 
  KIRK MERRICKS , 
 Appellant  
 
 v.      D1-17-027 
            
 
BOSTON POLICE DEPARTMENT,  
 Respondent  
 
Appearance for Appellant:     Bryan Decker,  Esq. 
       Decker & Rubin, P.C.  
       295 Freeport Street  
       Boston, MA 02122  
       
Appearance for Respondent:     Katherine Hoffman, Esq. 
       Boston Police Department  
       Office of the Legal Advisor  
       One Schroeder Plaza  
       Boston, MA 02120     
            
Commissioner:      Cynthia A. Ittleman  
 
DECISION  
 
The Appellant, Kirk Merricks , (Mr. Merricks  or Appellant) acting pursuant to G.L. c. 31, 
§ 43, filed a timely appeal with the Civil Service Commission (Commission or CSC) on 
February 7, 2017 contesting the decision of the Boston Police Department (BPD or Respondent) 
to terminate h is employment  as a police officer .  A pre -hearing conference was held on March 
21, 2017 at the Commission.  The full hearing was held on May 9 and June 2, 2017 at the 2 
 Commission.1  Witnesses, except for the Appellant, were sequestered.  Pursuant to the 
Appellant’s written request  at the h earing , the hearing was public.   The full hearing was digitally 
recorded .  The Commission sent copies of the digital recording to the parties.2  Both parties 
submitted post -hearing briefs to the Commission.  
FINDINGS OF FACT:  
 Forty-seven (47) exhibits wer e entered into evidence in total  (eight (8) by the Appellant 
and thirty -nine (39) by the Respondent) .  Based on these exhibits, the testimony of the following 
witnesses:  
Called by the Respondent : 
 Richard Driscoll, Lieutenant (Lt.) Detective (Det.), B PD3  
 Charles Warnock, Det., Plymouth Police Department (PPD)  
 Brian McEachern, Lt. Det., BPD  
 Frank Mancini, Superintendent (Supt.), BPD  
 Scott Vecchi , Sergeant (S gt.), PPD   
 
Called by the Appellant :  
 Patrick Rose, Officer, BPD , and President of the Boston Police Patrolmen’s Association 
(BPPA)  
 Appellant  
 
and taking administrative notice of all matters filed in the case ; pertinent statutes, case law, 
regulations, rules, and policies ; and reasonable inferences from the credible evidence; a 
preponderance of the evidence establishes the following facts:  
 
 
                                                           
1 The Standard Adjudicatory Rules of Practice and Procedure, 801 CMR §§1.00, et seq ., apply to adjudicatory 
hearings before the Commission with G.L. c. 31 or any Commission rules taking precedence.   
2 If there is a judicial appeal of this decision, the pla intiff in the judicial appeal would be obligated to supply the 
court with a transcript of this hearing to the extent that he/she wishes to challenge the decision as unsupported by the 
substantial evidence, arbitrary and capricious, or an abuse of discretio n.   
3 At the time of the events in this case, Lt. Det. Driscoll was a BPD Sergeant.  3 
 Background  
1. The Appellant began employment as a police officer at the BPD in or about 2001.  (R.Ex. 
25) 
2. The Appellant served in the U.S. Marine Corps, active duty, from 1990 to 1996 (6) years, 
although he was not deployed overseas on active duty.  Thereafter, he served in the Army 
National Guard as a military police officer from 1996 to 2003.   He served in Afghanistan 
from 2002 to 2003.  (R.Ex. 25)  
3. In the Marine Corps, the Appellant’s specialty was logistics, driv ing various trucks .  
While in the National Guard, the Appellant served in logistics for a while then became a 
military police officer and he served as such in Afghanistan.   (R.Ex. 25 ) 
4. After  the Appellant re turned to the U.S. in 2003 from  active duty in Afghanistan, the 
Appellant returned to his residence in Dorchester .  The Appellant and Ms. A became 
engaged in 2004.  Sometime b etween 2004 and 2006, the Appellant also began  living 
with Ms. A in Plymouth ; most of  his belongings were also at the Plymouth house.   The 
Merricks were married in or about 2009.  Also living at the Plymouth house  were Ms. 
A’s mother, who was ill,  and the Appellant’s school -aged daughter .  Ms. A has two (2) 
sons (sons “A” and “B”)  both of whom had lived at the Plymouth house for unknown 
periods of time .  Son A enlisted in  the Marines in early 2013 .  Son B enlisted in the Navy 
in August 2013.  Both the Appellant and Ms. A claim to have been at least part owners of 
the Plymouth house  but Ms. A also reported at times that the house belonged to her 
and/or her mother.4   The Appellant and Ms. A were separated in or about May 2013 and 
subsequently divorced.  (R.Ex s. 8, 25, 27, 28, 32)   
                                                           
4 Ownership of the Plymouth house was not established here but it has been established, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, that the Appellant lived at  the Plymouth house for years .   4 
 5. The Appellant  did some work on the lower level/basement of the Plymouth house , 
referred to as the “man cave”, where he maintained and/or worked on guns.  He owned  a 
shotgun, a .45 Glock, his BPD duty weapon (also a Glock)  and an old western rifle that 
he was fixing.  (R.Ex. 23) He had ammunition for these guns .  In the master bedroom 
closet, the Appellant had a BPD evidence bag that he used for loose ammunition.  In the 
man cave, he had a rifle rounds holder  that could hold approximately 10 rounds  for the 
rifle he was working on .  (R.Ex . 27, p. 14 ; R.Ex. 32, p. 120; R.Ex. 12 , p. 2 )  The 
Appellant had a  license to carry firearms (LTC)  but it expired on November 3, 2012.  
(R.Exs. 10 , 12 and 22 )  No one else living in the house at the time had a n LTC .  (R.Ex. 
32, p. 76)              
6. By letter dated January 27, 2017, Commissioner Evans sent the Appellant a “notice of 
termination” of employment for violations of BPD rules in relation to a restraining order 
issued against the Appellant in May 2013 at the request of Ms. A and in connection with 
explosives found at the Plymouth house  in July 2013 .  (R.Ex. 34)  
Restraining Order  
7. In or about the middle of May, 2013, the Appellant told Ms. A that he wanted to get a 
divorce.  (R.Ex. 1)    
8. On Friday  evening , May 31, 2013 , the Appellant and Ms. A had a loud, contentious 
verbal argument  in their house .  Among other things, the Appellant was yelling that Ms. 
A had called his girlfriend and Ms. A yelled at the Appellant that he had not been paying 
the bills.  (R.Ex s. 1 and 2)    The Appella nt “got caught cheating twice” during the 
marriage.  (R.Ex. 25, p. 18)   5 
 9. At approximately 8:40  pm on May 31, 2013 , the PPD  received a call from Ms. A, 
reported as a domestic disturbance at the Appellant’s address in Plymouth.  The PPD 
dispatched Sgt. B, Officer P and Officer F to the Appellant’s address.  Officer F reported,  
[we] were dispatched [to the Appellant’s address] regarding a report of a domes tic 
verbal dispute. Upon arrival we located Mr. Kirk Merricks on the front porch of 
the residence.  Mr. Merricks stated he was inside a short time ago, when his wife 
[Ms. A] began arguing with him over an assortment of topics. Mr. Merricks 
denied there wer e any threats or assaults during this argument.  Mr. Merricks 
stated he was waiting for his laundry to dry ( approx. 10 minutes) and was then 
leaving the residence to go to work.  
 
Next, I spoke w ith [M s. A] inside the kitchen. [Ms. A] stated she and her hus band 
have been having marital problems and toni ght, there was an argument over 
financial matters and some other things.  During the argument there was some 
loud yelling, but no threats of assaults.  [Ms. A]  stated she then left the kitchen 
and called police to help end the arguing.  
 
Both  Mr. and [Ms. A]  were advised of their Abuse Rights  under MGL C. 209A  
and both refused further services .  Both  stated there had been no assaults or 
threats, just some verbal arguing.  Mr. Merricks stated he was going to leave 
within five minutes to work the overnight shift in Boston.  [Ms. A] was satisfied 
with this ending.  … 
(R.Ex. 1)  
 
10. After the Appellant left the Plymouth house on May 31, 2013, he did not return to the 
house except when he was escorted by police to obtain his belonging s.  (Testimony of 
Appellant; R. Ex. 25, p. 19 -20)  After the Appellant left the house, his daughter continued 
to live at the Plymouth house with Ms. A to complete her schooling.  (R.Ex. 25, p. 21)  
11. At approximately 11  pm the same night (May 31, 2013), Officer TW was assigned to 
respond to the Appellant’s residence again, this time to assist Ms. A in completing a 
request for a domestic violence (209A) restraining order.   Officer TW reported,  
… .  I was informed by the shi ft commander, Lt. [H] that the  female party, 
identified as [M s. A] had called the police station requesting an emergency 209A.  6 
 [Ms. A]  was involved with a verbal domestic that Officer [F] and [Officer P] had 
responded to this evening. (Ref. Officer [F’s] report).  
 
Upon my arrival (sic) the residence I spoke with [M s. A].   I asked her if her 
husband Kirk Merricks was also home.  She stated that he left for work around 
[10pm ].  I asked her if anything had happened after our Officers responded to her 
residence.  She stated no.  I asked her if there had been threats or abuse made after 
our Officer cleared, she stated no.  [Ms. A]  stated that she wanted to make sure 
that her hus band could not return to the residence on Sunday.  I asked her why, 
she stated she didn’t want him to take anything out of the house or break anything 
inside the house.  
 
I asked her if she was in fear for her life or anyone that resided at the residence, 
she stated no.  I explained the process for obtaining a (sic) emergency 209A.   
[Ms. A]  stated that she wanted to complete the process .  Once the 209A package 
was completed, I contacted the oncall judge, …  I explained the information that 
was passed on to me regarding the incident. [ The judge] asked to speak with [Ms. 
A].  I handed her the phone.  
 
A short time later [ the judge] asked to speak with me once again, he informed me 
that after speaking with [Ms. A] he would not be issuing the emergency 209A 
order , he stated that he gave her instructions to call the police if any further 
incidents occurred between her and Mr. Merricks.   … I informed dispatch of the 
order (sic) was not being issued and I cleared from the residence. …  
(R.Ex. 1)  
 
12. On Monday, June  3, 2013, at approximately 2:30  pm, PPD Officer B reported,  
… I was directed by Lt. D.  [F] to follow up with this incident.  I was provided 
with the affidavit [Ms. A] completed when applying for her emergency 209A 
abuse prevention order.5  Lt. F directed m y attention to where [Ms. A]  writes:  
‘When I went into the bathroom to call 911 I closed the door & locked it.  
He kicked the door op en as he was yelling & screaming at me.’  
 
Lt. [F] directed me to re-interview [Ms. A] on video  about the incident and  
                                                           
5 I take administrative notice that Officer B is referring in his report to the affidavit and restraining order application 
submitted to the on -call judge on the night of May 31 since that affidavit is not in the record and the quoted text does 
not appear i n the affidavit that Ms. A submitted to court on June 4 (one day after PPD interviewed her) in support of 
her request for a 209A order.   7 
 examine any damage done to the bathroom door during the incident.  
I called [Ms. A] on her cell phone and left a message for her.  I went to the 
residence … but found … no answer at the door.  Several hours later , I 
received a call back from [Ms. A]  and ma de arrangements to speak with 
her at [PPD].  
 
Upon [Ms. A’s] arrival, she agreed to an audio and video recorded 
interview.  I was assisted in the interview by Det. [T].  The following is a 
synopsis of my interview with [Ms. A] (please see recording for complete  
interview ): 
 
[Ms. A] stated Mr. Merricks told her on May 13, 2013 that their marriage 
was over and he wanted a divorce.  [Ms. A] went on for some time 
explaining to me the arguments the two have been having over unpaid 
bills and money issues.   On  Friday, May 31, 2013 , the two continued to 
argue ab out money issues.  Mr. Merricks was ‘screaming’ at [Ms. A]  and 
calling her names.  [Ms. A]  admitted she too was yelling at Mr. Mer ricks 
and called him some names.   [Ms. A] s tated Mr. Merricks put his face  
close to her face and was yelling at her.  [Ms. A] admitted she was yelling 
back at him in this manner.  
 
[Ms. A]  told me she was tired of Mr. Merricks yelling at her and 
demanded he leave the house several times throughout the argument.  [Ms. 
A] decided t o call the police to have Mr. Merricks removed.  [Ms. A]  
grabbed the house phone and locked herself in the bathroom where she 
called the police.  [Ms. A] told me she was on the phone with the 
dispatcher when Mr. Merricks kicked open the bathroom door .  Mr.  
Merricks yelled to [Ms. A]  something to the effect of ‘don’t lock doors in 
this house’.  
 
[Ms. A] told me she was at the very back of the bathroom when Mr. 
Merricks kicked open the door. [Ms. A] stated she was not struck with the 
door.  [Ms. A] stated Mr. Merricks never entered the bathroom  but just 
shouted a few words at her and walked away.   [Ms. A] told me she did 
not believe Mr. Merricks was going to assault her.    [Ms. A] told me she 
was never in fear of being assaulted .  …     
 
…  Several hours later , [Ms. A]  called the [PPD] back and requested an 
emergency 209A order.  Officer [ TW] arrived and assisted [Ms. A]  with 
the paperwork.  [Ms. A] told me she spoke with the on call judge and 8 
 explained the situation at the house.  [Ms. A] told the judge about Mr. 
Merricks kicking the door.  The judge denied the order stating no abuse 
occurred  and told [Ms. A] she could apply for another order in person at 
the cour t today.  [Ms. A] had not y et gone to the court to apply for an 
order.  
 
[Ms. A] told me multiple ti mes she is not in fear of Mr. Merricks.   [Ms. 
A] stated Mr. Merricks has never physically assaulted her or placed her in 
fear of being assaulted.  [Ms. A] stated Mr. Merricks has never threatened 
her.   … [Ms. A] stated several times she was in fear of Mr . Merricks 
returning to the house and either taking or destroying their property.  [Ms. 
A] was not in fear for her safety .  … 
 
Det. [T] and I w ent back to the residence with [Ms. A] where we were able to 
view the door.  I noticed the door was made of extremely thin particle board type 
material .  A foot sized hole was found towards the bottom of the door only 
through the outer panel of the door.  The latch and knob  were found to be loose 
but in t act.  The door was still able to be closed, locked, and la tched .  Det. [T] 
took pictures of the damage.  
(R.Ex. 1) (emphasis added)  
 
13. On Tuesday, June 4 , 2013 , Ms. A went to court to request an ex parte 209A  order 
against her husband, the Appellant.  In her  affidavit in support of her request for a 209A 
order, Ms. A wrote, in part,  
Kirk Merricks my current husband was at our house.  He stated on May 13, 2013 
that he didn’t want to be married any longer ...  We need to figure out an 
arrangement as his … daughter just m oved in June 2012 and he got full custody 
… and would like to finish … school …   We have been arguing over unpaid bills 
and supposedly phone calls to his current friend/girlfriend.  On May 31st around 
8pm Kirk was yelling  & screaming at me about calling [a  girlfriend] (sic) stated I 
didn’t.  Asked when he planned  on paying bills – doesn’t know.  He was yelling 
& scre aming face to face at me.  Name calling (sic) & slamming things.  I asked 
him several time (sic) to leave the house.  He said no I could leave.   My mother 
who is [elderly and ill] was on the LR couch during this whole argument.  I 
grabbed the house phone – walked into the bathroom – closed & locked the door.  
Kirk kicked the door in and told me to never lock doors in his house as he 
proceeded to yell & scream.   …. I am in fear of him returning to the house to 9 
 continue with his verbal abuse and damage other items in my ‘mothers’  (in 
quotes)(sic) home .   
(R.Ex. 2) (emphasis added)   
 
 14. Also on June 4, 2013, the PPD faxed its incident report regarding the Appellant and  
 Ms. A to BPD Sgt. Coyne in Area A -1, where the Appellant w orked .  (R.Ex.  
 1)  
15.  The court granted Ms.  A’s request for a 209A order on June 4, 2013, indicating that 
the order would expire on June 18 but that a hearing would be held prior to the expiration 
of the order.  The order included a requirement that the Appellant surrender his guns to 
the police, which he did6.  It a lso ordered the Appellant to “surrender your service firearm 
and your license to carry [to] your commanding officer at the end of each shift ”.  (R.Ex. 
2)   The Appellant had kept these guns even though his LTC expired in November 2012.  
(R.Ex. 22; Administ rative Notice )   
16. Both parties attended a  subsequent court hearing  on the 209A order .  On June 20, 
2013, the 209A order  was ended with the court checking the boxes on the order form, 
indicating , “E. PRIOR COURT ORDER TERMINATED … TERMINATED AT 
PLAINTIFF’S REQUEST .” (R.Exs. 2 (emphasis  in original) and R.Ex. 27)         
17. The Appellant  filed appropriate notices with BPD regarding the 209A order, 
termination of the order, his address change and his receipt of a divorce summons.  
(R.Ex. 5)  
18. Shortly after the 209A order was ended, the BPD opened Internal Affairs case IA D 
2013 -0224.  (R.Ex. 3)   BPD Sgt. Driscoll was assigned to inve stigat e the 209A order 
                                                           
6 The Appellant’s duty weapon and his off -duty Glock were taken by the BPD, his shotgun and the old western non -
functi oning rifle that he was restoring were taken by the PPD.  As of his October 2015 interview by the BPD 
regarding the explosives, the Appellant had not reclaimed his guns.   (R.Exs. 25 and 27)  It is unknown if the 
Appellant applied for, and was able to rene w his LTC.  10 
 against the Appellant.   He tried repeatedly to locate Ms. A in order to interview her in 
person.  When he finally reached her, she declined to be interviewed in person.  Instead, 
on June 28, 2013, Sgt. Drisc oll conducted a  recorded phone interview  with Ms. A lasting 
seven (7) minutes.  (R.Ex. 3; Testimony of Driscoll)  
19. Ms. A told Sgt. Driscoll, in part, that on May 31, 2013, she and the Appellant had 
been arguing about unpaid bills and allegations that Ms. A called the Appellant’s 
girlfriend  and Ms. A asked the Appellant to leave the house but he didn’t.  In their phone 
call, Ms. A then told Sgt. Driscoll ,  
I grabbed the house telephone. I just nonchalantly walked into my bathroom, 
closed the door and locked it to call 911.   … Mr. Merricks kicked the bathroom 
door in, and … I was in fear of my safety  of what was going to happ en … He 
continued yelling and screaming and slamming things until the Plymouth Police 
arrived. …. An officer … said Mr. Merricks would be leaving in about ten 
minutes.  I asked if the officer was going to stay.  He said ‘no. if there’s any 
problems … just give us a call back.’  Mr. Merricks finished doing his laundry, 
and he soon went out the door …  I did call Plymouth Police back at 11:00pm 
asking for a restraining order in the fear of he would come in, God knows to do 
what, because we still have the prop erty together.  I did talk to a Judge McCollum  
… I explained … and the judge denied it. … [Mr. Merricks] didn’t make any 
threats . … There’s no physical abuse.  It was all verbal abuse.   … we were 
yelling and screaming …  As of the court order … as of last Thursday, I have 
exclusive and physical  use of this house.  It’s in my mother’s name . …  We’ve 
never had any physical abuse in the 12 years we’ve been together . … 
(R.Ex. 3) (emphasis added)  
 
20. Asked why she asked the court to end the 209A order , Ms. A told Sgt. Driscoll , “he 
has agreed he would not come back onto the property … The only time he’s able to come 
back is today at noon with a police officer detail from Plymouth to retrieve his items .” 
(Id.)(emphasis added)  
21.  Ten (10) minutes after Sgt. Driscoll conducted a recorded phone interview of Ms. A, 
Sgt. Driscoll and Sgt. Daniel Humphreys conducted a recorded audio -visual interview of 11 
 the Appellant for five (5) minutes.  The Appellant chose not to have any union or leg al 
representation at the interview.   When asked what happened on May 31, 2013, the 
Appellant reported that he and his wife, who were getting divorced, had an argument over 
bills and other matters, his wife called the police, the police arrived, the police  asked if 
there was any physical harm and both he and his wife (separately) said ‘no’.  The 
Appellant told the police he would be leaving shortly for work in Boston  and that was all .  
The Appellant did not mention that he had kicked the bathroom door but a dmitted that he 
did when Sgt. Driscoll a sked him.   When asked if the house belonged to him (and, 
apparently, Ms. A the Appellant said “yes”.  Asked if there was any physical abuse 
between the Appellant and Ms. A, the Appellant said “never”.  (R.Ex s. 4, 5)   
22. On an unknown date, Sgt. Drisc oll submitted his report to L t. Det. Hamilton for him 
to make findings based on Sgt. Driscoll’s report.  (R.Ex. 8, p. 17)7 
23.  On July 11, 2013, Sgt. Driscoll issued a report to Dep. Supt. Lisa Holmes , Assistant 
Chief of the Bureau of Professional Standards at the BPD , regarding his investigation of 
the Appellant and the 209A order that had been issued against the Appellant and been 
lifted.  The report is a memorandum with the subject “IAD Complaint #IAD2013 -0224 
Concer ning: violation of Rule 102 Sec. 35 ( Conformance to laws )”, and Ms. A is listed as 
the complainant .   (R.Ex. 5)(emphasis added)    
24. Rule 102, § 35 states  
Employees shall obey all laws … , all City of Boston ordinances and bylaws and 
any rule or regulation having the force of law of any board, officer, or 
commission having the power to make rules and regulations. An employee of the 
Department who commits any  criminal act shall be subject to disciplinary action 
up to and including discharge from the Department. Each case shall be considered 
                                                           
7 It appears that there is no document in the record from Lt. Det. Hamilton indicating his findings.   12 
 on its own merits, and the circumstances of each shall be fully reviewed before 
the final action is taken.  
(A.Ex. 1 ) 
 
25.  Sgt. Driscoll’s report summarizes his interviews of the Appellant and Ms. A and 
includes the PPD incident report s, the 209A court records, and the BPD Form 26 reports 
submitted by the Appellant to his superiors regarding the related events.  (R.Ex. 5 ; A.Exs. 
7 and 8 )  Although Sgt. Driscoll’s report references t he PPD audio -visual recording of the 
PPD interview of Ms. A and the photos PPD took of the damaged bathroom door at the 
Merricks home , he did not have them.  He requested them from the PPD but the PPD did 
not pro duce them.   Sgt. Driscoll did not follow up with PPD to obtain copies of th e 
recorded interview and photos though they would be important to an investigation.    
(Testimony of Driscoll ; R.Ex. 8, p. 26)  
26.  At the Commission hearing, Sgt. Driscoll denie d that he cannot assess someone’s 
credibility if he interviews them by  phone, rather than in person.  (Testimony of Driscoll)   
However, at the BPD hearing regarding  the 209A order , Sgt. Driscoll testified that he 
tried and failed multiple ti mes to interview Ms. A in person but she was unavailable.  As 
a result, Sgt. Driscoll testified at the BPD hearing, “  … I spoke with my supervisor and 
asked if it would be okay to conduct a phone interview, which we typically try to avoid, 
but he okayed it  ….”  (R.Ex. 8, p. 27)  Asked if it’s better to interview someone in person 
as opposed to over the phone, Sgt. Driscoll testified at the BPD hearing, “Preferably, 
yes.”  ( Id.)   Sgt. Driscoll has never met Ms. A.  (Testimony of Driscoll)              
27. Sgt. Driscoll’s report does not make a finding or recommendation that the allegations 
against the Appellant in this regard should be sustained .  (R.Exs.1 and 5; Administrative 
Notice)  13 
 28.  By memorandum dated February 3, 2014, Dep. Supt. Walcott wrote to Police 
Commissioner Evans that the Internal Affairs Division “sustained” the complaint against 
the Appellant that is the subject of  IAD2013 -0224  for violating BPD Rule 102, § 35, 
regarding conformance to laws . (A.Ex. 3)  
29.  By memorandum dated March 20, 2014 , Dep. Supt. Walcott informed the Appellant  
that the complaint against him in IAD2013 -0224 for violation of BPD Rule 102, § 35, 
regarding conformance to laws , was sustained.  (A.Ex. 4)  
30. By letter dated December 19, 2016, Commissioner Evans informed the Appellant that 
he was contemplating disciplinary action against him based on IAD 2013 -0224, for 
which there would be a hearing on December 29, 2016.  (R.Ex. 7)  Attached to the 
December 1 9, 2016 letter were copies of G.L. c. 31, §§ 41 -45 and a memorandum from 
Supt. Mancini (BPD Bureau of Professional Standards ) to the Police Commissioner, 
stating,  
I hereby bring the following complaint against Police Officer Kirk Merricks, I D# 
(redacted) , presented assigned to the BAT/Administrative Leave Section, for a 
violation (sic) Rule 102 § 3 (Conduct Unbecoming ). 
 
     Specification I  
On May 31, 2013, P.O. Merricks was involved in an argument with his wife, [Ms.  
A].  [Ms. A]  locked herself in the bathroom, called 911, and requested the 
removal of P.O. Merricks from the residence.  In response, P.O. Merricks kicked 
in the bathroom door, causing damage to the door.  Thereafter, [Ms. A]  obtained a 
restraining order against P.O. Merricks.  Such conduct reflects unfavorably on the 
Boston Police Department and is in violation of Rule 102 § 3 (Conduct 
Unbecoming ). 
(Id.)(emphasis added)  
 
 31. Rule 102, § 3 states,  
 
Employees shall conduct themselves at all times, both on and off duty,  in such a 
manner as to reflect most favorably on the Department . Conduct unbecoming an 14 
 employee shall include that which tends to indicate that the employee is unable or 
unfit to continue as a member of the Department, or tends to impair the operation 
of the Department or its employees . 
(A.Ex. 1) (emphasis added)  
 
32.  The disciplinary hearing was held on December 29, 2016, at which Sgt. Driscoll , 
then Lieutenant Driscoll,  and the Appellant testified.   The Appellant was represented by 
counsel at the BPD hearing.  (R.Ex. 8)8    
33. By memorandum dated January 23, 2017, Dep. Supt. Lydon , the hearing officer, 
issued his findings and his recommendation to Commissioner Evans  that the charge 
against the Appe llant for conduct unbecoming  (not for  conformance to laws) be 
sustained.  (R.Ex. 9; see also  R.Ex. 8, p. 1 8)  Dep. Supt. Lydon’s findings include  various 
statements  by Ms. A at different times to different people :  
“’I am in fear of him returning to the house to continue with his verbal abuse and 
damage other items  in my ‘mothers’  (sic) home. ’” 
“ … we still have the property together  …” 
 
“[Ms. A]  stated she was at the very back of the bathroom when Mr. Merricks 
kicked open the door and that she was not struck with the door.  She stated that 
Mr. Merricks never entered the bathroom but just shouted a few words at her and 
walked away .” 
 
“[Ms. A]  told [PPD]  Officer [B] several times that she was in fear of Mr. 
Merricks returning to the house and either taking or destroying their property.  
But she stated that she was not in fear for her safety .” 
 
At her  BPD  June 28, 2013 phone i nterview, [Ms. A] t old L t. Driscoll, “I grabbed 
the house telephone.  I just nonchalantly walked into my bathroom, closed the 
door and locked it to call 911, Mr. Merricks kicked the bathroom door in, and at 
that point in time, I was in fear of my safety  of what was going to happe n at that 
point in time.”  
(R.Ex. 9)  
                                                           
8 The Appellant was represented by a different attorney at the BPD hearing concerning the 209A order than the 
attorney who represented the Ap pellant at the Commission and at the BPD hearing concerning the explosives.  15 
  
34. Dep. Supt. Lydon’s report indicates  that the Appellant concurred that he and Ms. A 
had a verbal argument May 31 and he provided details of their argument and their 
impending divorce proceedings.  When asked at his interview if he kicked in the 
bathroom door when Ms. A’s was in there calling 911, the Appellant  admitted that he did 
and t hat his kick damaged the door, and he stated that the house belonged to him and Ms. 
A.  (R.Ex. 9)  
35. Dep. Supt. Lydon’s re port acknowledged that L t. Driscoll had not obtained the PPD 
video recording of Ms. A’s interview  or the PPD photos of the damaged bathroom door.  
It also acknowledged that Ms. A called the police  a second time on the night of May 31, 
2013 and that the on -call judge that night denied her request for a restraining order .  By 
the time that Ms. A called t he PPD the second time on May 3 1, the Appellant had left the 
house to work his night shift in Boston .  (R.Exs. 1 , 2 and 9)  
36. Dep. Supt. Lydon’s report did not indicate the r eason L t. Driscoll interviewed Ms. A 
by phone instead of an in -person interview is that Ms. A failed and/or refused to make 
herself available or that the court ended the 209A order on June 20, 2013 at Ms. A’s 
request . (R.Ex. 9; Administrative N otice)  
37.Officer Rose has been a member of the BPD for more than two (2) decades and is the  
BPPA President.  He has a lengthy and notable military record, including active duty 
experience.  The BPD has not disciplined a member of the force based entirely on a 
restraining order issued against them, although they may have been disciplined with 
regard to things that occurred in connection with the restraining order.  (Testimony of 
Rose)  
 16 
 Explosives  
38. From July 3 to July 7, 2013, Ms. A’s adult  son A was home with her at the Plymouth 
house on leave from the military  for the weekend .   Son A was attending training as a 
Military Police Officer at the time.  (R.Ex s. 10 and 11)   On July 6, 2013,  Ms. A and son 
A were “gathering i tems for her husband to pick up ” since h e had vacated the house .  
(R.Ex. 10  (PPD incident reports) )  
39. On July 11, 2013, at approximately 2:45  pm, f ive (5) days after Ms. A’s adult son A 
left her house, PPD Officer J and PPD Sgt. Vecchi were dispatched to the Plymouth 
house “for found property.”  (R.Ex. 10)    
40. Officer J arrived at the  Plymouth  house first.  Officer  J’s inci dent report that day  
indicat es that he “was advised to speak with the caller [Ms. A], and that there may be 
explosives (TNT) on scene.”  ( Id).  The Plymouth Fire Department had been notified of 
this matter and arrived shortly after O fficer J .   Officer J spoke with Ms. A, asking her the 
location of the explosives.  Ms. A directed Officer J to the back bedroom.  In the 
bedroom, Ms. A “directed [Officer J’s]  attention to a metal box which was on a shelf in 
the closet.”   (Id.)  Officer J removed the  box carefully, opened it and found, “3 ea 1/4LB 
TNT explosive stick wrapped in a military green cloth container.  1 ea 1/4LB TNT 
explosive stick in plain view within the box, this stick had a piece of grey masking take 
(sic) affixed to the top.  Asst. rou nds of ammunition.”  ( Id.)   
41. At approximately 2:50  pm on July 11, 2013,  Sgt. Vecchi was informed of the report 
of explosives at the Plymouth house and he went to the scene , arriving at the house 
shortly thereafter.  Officer J .  Sgt. Vecchi has been at the PPD for more than twenty 
years.  He has a lengthy military background; he has served on active duty in a number of 17 
 places outside the U.S.  He is a retired Marine gunnery sergeant who received training 
with explosives while in t he military.  While in the service, he cleared landing zones, 
worked with torpedoes, operated explosives ranges, and carried a grenade launcher.  In 
the military, explosives are monitored and must be signed out and signed back in when 
returned.  (Testimony  of Vecchi)  
42.  Ms. A directed Sgt. Vecchi to the  right rear bedroom of the Plymouth house where 
Officer J was located.  Officer J directed Sgt. Vecch i’s attention to the b ox he had 
opened .  Sgt. Vecchi reported,  
On the open lid of this box I observed fou r (4) green tubes clearly labeled as ¼ lb 
TNT with a yellow/gold colored band around the tube.  Through my training  and 
experience I immediately  recognized these as military grade High Explosives .  As 
they were not primed and no blasting caps or det cord w as located in this box I 
knew … tha t these were stable and no t in danger of detonating .  Also located was 
a Boston Police Evidence bag containing assorted ammunition . 
 
As a precaution for the safety of all I directed that [Ms.  A] and [the Appellant’s 
daughter] evacuate the house.   … 
 
[Ms. A] then led us to the off white metal shed located at the back left of the yard 
where she stated additional explosives were located.  She then directed us to a 
black plastic container with a hi nged lid and clasp.  She stated inside  of this was a 
brief case with explosives.   
 
Officer [J] and I opened this container and brief case and inside located a cloth 
bandoleer of the type issued by the military  which contained four (4) 40mm High 
Explosive/ Dual Purpose (HEDP) grenades, which are used in a military M203 
Grenade Launcher.  I observe d these grenades had a yellow/gold colored head 
which  indicated them to be High Explosive/Dual Purpose (HEDP) and that the 
primers were intact and not dimpled indic ating that they w ere fully functional . 
We were also show n two (2) lengths of military green time fuse  each with a Non -
Electric pull igniter attached.  …  
 
We were also shown three (3) lengths of white det cor d with copper colored 
blasting caps attached to each end, with the word BOOSTER labeled on each, and 
one aluminum blasting cap.  18 
  
Through my training and experience I immediately recognized all of these as 
military grade High Explosives that no civilian should possess.  
 
I also knew that these items were fairly stable  and should not explode if handled 
carefully …  
 
I then notif ied dispatch and [Lt. F] that I needed the State Police Bomb Squad to 
respon d … 
 
I then directed Officer [J] to go to all of the houses that bordered the [house] and 
advise them to stay in the house …  As I knew these explosives to be stable  and 
did not fear an imminent explosion I did not order an evacuation.  …  
 
While speaking with [ Ms. A] she informed me that  … her son [A] was home on 
leave from the  … Marine Corps for the weekend [of July 6] ... that she had 
shown the items to him and he informed her that they we re explosive and she 
should not touch them .   
 
[Ms. A] stated that she  then contacted her attorney as to how she should proceed, 
and had called us today.  
 
She also informed me that [the Appellant] had served six (6) years in the United 
States Maine Corps, and seven (7) years in the Army National Guard.  
 
At approx  (sic) 3:35pm the State Police Bomb Squad arrived, followed shortly 
thereafter by Sgt. [P] of the State Police Fire Marshals (sic) office, and State 
Police Crime Scene Services. …  
 
I then filled out a … consent to search form and [Ms.  A] signed it …  
 [PPD]  Lieut. [F] made notification to Boston Police of the circumstances and the 
involvement of BPD Officer Kir k Merricks, they informed him that Merricks was 
not a member of their Bomb Squad and had no Police purpose in possessing these 
explosives. …  
 
…  a sea rch warrant was later obtained.  
(R.Ex. 10) (emphasis  added) (see also  R.Exs. 13 and 14)  
 
43. It is not uncommon for members of the BPD to take BPD evidence bags home to hold 
some of their gear.  (Testimony of Rose)                19 
 44. After an initial search of the Plymouth house, PPD Officer W arnock  prepared an 
affidavit for the search warrant on July 1 1, 2013.  At some point that day, Officer 
Warnock  also talked to Sgt. P of the State Police Bomb Squad and Trooper B of the State 
Police Crime Scene Section.  Officer W arnock  “requested that latent finger print analysis 
of any evidence be conducted.  Sgt. [P] advised that due to the volatile nature of high 
explosives finger print analysis would not be safe  and could endanger lives.  Sgt. [P] also 
reported … that the M203 Grenades were stamped 1974.  Sgt. [P] reported that he would 
be speaking with [U.S. Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms] officials to deter mine 
the location were (sic) the explosives were stolen from could be obtained.”  (R.Ex. 
10)(emphasis added)      
45. At approximately 7  pm on July 1 1, 2013 , a PPD officer arrived at the Plymouth house 
with a search warrant.  PPD Officer R reported that t he following were “located, 
photographed then secured by the MSP Bomb Squad[:]  
(4) 40mm HEDP (High Explosive Dual Purpose) g renades, located in the shed  
(3) Lengths of explosive de tonation cord w/ 2 blasting caps at each end, (6) 
blasting caps total, located  in the shed  
(4) ¼ pound boosters of TNT, located in the upstairs bedroom  
(2) Lengths of time fuse with igniters, located in the shed …”  
(R.Ex. 10) (see also  R.Ex. 12)  
 
Then PPD Officer R “photographed and secure d the following items which were later 
inventoried and placed into evidence at [PPD] police headquarters[:]  
A-(10) Shotgun shells, located in the upstairs bedroom  
B-(25) Rounds of .380 caliber ammunition, located in the upstairs bedroom  
C-(3) Rounds of .40 caliber ammunition, located in the upstairs bedroom  
D-(2) Rounds of .45 caliber ammunition, located in the upstairs bedroom  
E-(62) Rounds of .22 caliber ammunition, located in the upstairs bedroom  
F-(7) Rifle rounds of 32 Winchester, located in the basemen t  
G-(38) Rifle rounds (unknown types), located in the upstairs bedroom ….”  20 
 (R.Ex. 10) (see also  R.Ex. 12)  
 
46. The shed in which some explosives materials were found was not locked (R.Ex. 25) 
but the backyard fence around it was locked .  (R.Ex. 24)  
47. There was what appeared to be a wooden storage box in the shed with the name 
“MERRICKS” on it.  (R.Ex. 12, pp. 3 and 4)  
48. After the search warrant was executed, “ [i]t was decided by the Bomb T ech’s (sic) 
that the copper blasting caps attached to the whit e det cord were not stable enough for 
long term storage  as evidence due to their age.  They then cut the copper blasting caps 
from the det cord, and secured them for later detonation. …”   (R.Ex. 10) (emphasis added)   
The blasting caps were subsequently deto nated at another location.  ( Id.) 
49. In view of what was found at the Merricks house, Sgt. Vecchi concluded,  
As these explosives were all military grade, that no civilian should posses (sic) 
these, that an extensive permitting process exists for any posse ssion of explosives, 
and strict storage requirements exist requiring all explosives be stored in a blast 
rated magazine, and none of these conditions were met (sic).  It is believed that 
these items were all stolen from the US military . 
(R.Ex. 10)  
 
 50. PPD Officer W arnock  reported that during the search of the Plymouth house,   
… the Boston Police Dept was contacted and requested that Kirk Merricks present 
himself to the Plymouth Police for questioning.  I was advised that Merricks was 
summons (sic) to report to his commanding Officer and that Merricks would then 
be transported  to Plymouth.  … When Merricks arrived … I … advised Merricks 
of his Miranda Warnings.  Merricks ... elected to NOT speak to me upon advice 
from his counsel.  
(R.Ex. 10)  
 
51. Later that evening ( July 11, 2013 ), the Appellant was arrested and charged with  
multiple counts each of possession of explosives in violation of G.L. c. 266, § 102C, 21 
 receipt of stolen property in violation of G.L. c. 266, § 60, and possession of ammunition 
witho ut a license in violation of G.L. c. 269, § 10.  (R.Ex. 10)  
52. G.L. c. 266, § 102C provides, in pertinent part,  
Whoever, without lawful authority, knowingly develops, produces, stockpiles, 
acquires, transports, possesses, controls, places, secretes or uses any biological, 
chemical or nuclear weapon or delivery system, with the intent to cause death, 
bodily injury or  property damage , shall be punished by imprisonment in the house 
of correction for not more than 2 and one -half years or by imprisonment in the 
state prison for not more than 25 years or by a fine of not more than $50,000, or 
by both such fine and imprison ment.  
(Id.) 
 
53. G.L. c. 266, § 60 provides, in pertinent part,  
Whoever buys, receives or aids in the concealment of stolen or embezzled 
property, knowing it to have been stolen or embezzled, or whoever with intent to 
defraud buys, receives or aids in the concealment of property … and who intends 
to deprive its rightful owner permanently of the use and enjoyment of said 
property shall be punished as follows: if the value of such property does not 
exceed $250, for a first offense by imprisonment in the house  of correction for not 
more than 21/2 years or by a fine of not more than $1,000; …  or if the value of 
such property exceeds $250 by imprisonment in the house of correction for not 
more than 21/2 years or by imprisonment in the state prison for not more t han 5 
years or by a fine of not more than $5,000 or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
… 
(Id.) 
 
54. On July 12, 2013, PPD Officer W arnock  conducted an interview of  Ms. A regarding 
the explosives.  The interview wa s audio/video record ed.  Ms. A stated that  the Appellant 
moved his belonging s into the Plymouth home  when he returned from active duty in 
Afghanistan ; he had a brief case that was found in the shed that the Appellant told her , at 
some point in time , had “military stuff” in it;  a few years ago she asked the Appellant 
where the brief case was and he told her  he “got ride (sic) of it ”; she “never had a 
conversation with [the Appellant] in regard to explosives or any of his ‘Military stuff’”; 
and she denied that the explosives belonged to her or son A.   (R.Ex. 10 ; see also  R.Ex. 22 
 24, p. 10 )  Officer W arnock  did not ask Ms. A why she waited a number of days after she 
found the explosives to call PPD, and son  A had warned her about them.  (R.Ex. 32, p. 
24)  The PPD was unable to produce for the BPD a copy of Officer W arnock ’s recorded 
interview of Ms. A concerning the explosives .  (R.Ex. 32, pp.  41-42)    
55. Previously, Ms. A told the Appellant that some things in the shed belonged to her 
father, who had ser ved in the Navy.  (R.Ex. 27)  
56. At or around the time of Ms. A’s interview by the PPD, PPD Officer W arnock   spoke 
to son A’s superior officer who said that son A did not have access to grenades and he 
could not get them off of the base.  (R.Ex. 32, p. 28)  
57. On September 20, 2013, Ms. A, PPD Officer W arnock , and representatives of the 
State Police Crime Scene Section and the Bomb Squad  testified at a grand jury 
concerning the crimin al charges against the Appellant .  (R.Ex. 16)      
58. On September 20 , 2013, after the grand jury received the testimony , the Appellant 
was indicted for two (2)  counts of possession of explosives in violation of G.L. c.  266, § 
102(c) and four (4) counts of receiving stolen property in violation of G.L. c. 266, § 60.   
(R.Ex. 15  and 19 )  
59. On October 2, 2013, Sgt. Det. Hoffman, of the BPD Bureau of Professional Standards 
and Development Anti -Corruption Divisi on (BPS/ACD) sent a memo to L t. Det. 
McEachern, Commander of the BPS/ACD, referencing Case No. 13 -034, informing him 
of the grand jury’s action.  (R.Ex. 16)     23 
 60. On October 10, 2013, the BPD hand -served a notice of the Appellant’s suspension 
without pay  to the Appellant’s mother in  Dorchester .   (R.Ex. 19)9   
61. On November 27, 2013, PPD Officer W arnock  sent an email message to son A’ s 
superior officer requesting  a letter indicating that son A  “had not been trained in the use 
of or been in a position to possess the explosives located with his (sic) incident.”  (R.Ex. 
10)  Officer W arnock  had sent the same or a similar email message to the same superior 
officer in August, October and earlier in November.  ( Id.)  There is no indication in the 
record that Officer W arnock  received such a letter from son A ’s superior officer.  
(Administrative Notice)  
62. On December 15, 201 4, the Assistant District Attorney was “unable to locate a 
necessary witness” and the case was dismissed without prejudice  for lack of prosecution .  
(R.Ex. 20)   The necessary witness was Ms. A.  (R.Ex. 2810) 
63. On December 16, 2014, BPD Sgt. Det. Hoffman  sent a memo to Lt. Det. Hamilton, 
Commander of the ACD, regarding his (Sgt. Det. Hoffman’s) work with ATF Special 
Agent (S/A) M about the explosives found at the Plymouth house.  S/A M  conducted a 
trace of the explosives.  (R.Ex. 17)   
64. On December 18, 2014, Sgt. Det. Hoffman wrote a memo to Lt. Det. Hamilton 
indicating t hat ATF S/A M reported that he had identified the explosives, that some of the 
explosives were manufactured in 1988 and some in 1993, th at he found the locations 
where  those explosives were manufactured, that there were no reported “thefts, 
                                                           
9 However, at some point thereafter, the Appellant was assigned to the BAT/Administrative Leave Section, as noted 
in Fact 30  supra .  (R.Ex. 7)  The Appellant testified at the Commi ssion that he was on administrative leave for three 
(3) years.   
10 R.Ex. 28 is BPD Sgt. Rosado’s report to Dep. Supt. Walcott regarding her investigation of the explosives 
allegations against the Appellant.  I note that although the report is dated Februar y 10, 2015, many documents and/or 
events on which it relies (such as interviews of the Appellant and others) are dated later.  As a result, it appears that 
the February 10, 2015 date of the report is inaccurate.    24 
 recoveries or losses” of th ose explosives and that there is no information indicating where 
those explosives were relocated after having been manufactured .  (R.Ex. 18) (emphasis 
added)   S/A M added that the people who most commonly come in contact with such 
explosives ar e military engineers or  EOD (explosives ordinance disposal11) specialists, 
that such explosives are “closely accounted for during training exercises but during active 
combat missions there is no way of keeping an exact count of these mutitions (sic). … 
The likelyhood (sic) of someone coming into unlawful contact with EOD’s are military 
personnel who either stoled (sic) for themselves or for others who received these devices 
as stolen property.”  (R.Ex. 17; see also  R.Exs. 18 and 19)  The explosives that can  be 
stored safely were stored at the State Police Bomb Unit.  (R.Ex. 17)    
65. Son A’s military superior officer reported to the PPD by phone that son A did not 
have access to explosives in his military service and that he had not been deployed 
overseas.  NCIS reported to BPD Det. Lt. McEachern by phone that son B did not have 
access  to explosives in his military service and that he was on an aircraft carrier but that 
he had not been deployed.   (R.Ex. 32, p p. 71-73)  
66. On December 30, 2014, Sgt. D et. Hoffman wrote a report concluding his criminal 
investigation , indicating that the Appellant had been criminally charged and indicted but 
that the criminal case in court was dismissed for lack of prosecution after Ms. A failed or 
refused to appear at the court criminal trial .  (R.Ex. 19)   Sgt. Det. Hoffman’s memos 
regarding the explosives refer ence the PPD incident reports.  (R.Exs. 16 – 19; 
Administrative Notice ) 
                                                           
11 See https://www.goarmy.com/careers -and-jobs/browse -career -and-job-categories/intelligence -and-combat-
support/explosive -ordnance -disposal -specialist.html  (March 14, 2018).  
 25 
 67. The BPD investigation relating to the explosives next went to the BPD Internal 
Affairs Division (IAD Case No. IAD2014 -0611) and was assigned to Sgt. Det. Rosado , 
who was aided by others in the IAD.   Sgt. Rosado’s final report to Dep. Supt. Walcott, 
and Assistant Chief of the BPD Bureau of Professional Standards noted, “ … the majority 
of this investigation was conducted by the [PPD] and [Sgt. Det.] Hoffman of the [B PD] 
Anti-Corruption Unit.”  ( R.Ex. 28)   
68. As part of her investigation, Sgt . Det. Rosado  interviewed PPD Det. W arnock , PPD 
Det. R, PPD , Det. J, PPD Sgt. Vecchi and the Appellant (whom she interviewed twice).  
However, the interview  of PPD Det. R , who helped execut e the search warrant at the 
Plymouth house,  “suddenly cuts off” early in the interview (R.Ex. 26) .  The interviews of 
PPD Det. J , who was at the house  on July 11 , and PPD Sgt. Vecchi, who was the PPD 
incident commander at the house  on July 11 , were not recorded at all because the 
recorder “malfunctioned”.  (R.Exs. 26 and 28)   Sgt. Det. Rosado’s investigation report 
disclosed these problems  and indicated that her report on the unrecorded interviews was 
based on notes that she took at the inter views.   Sgt. Rosado also included in her report a 
number of documents, such as the PPD Incident Report, the initial criminal complaint, 
the Superior Court case summary, the PFD report, and State Police Investigation 
document s.  (R.Ex. 28 ; see also  R.Exs. 13 and 14)   The BPD was unable to  interview Ms. 
A concerning the explosives.  (Administrative Notice)  
69. Sgt. Rosado  interview ed PPD Det. W arnock  on February 26, 2015.  This nine (9) -
minute interview  was recorded.  PPD Det. W arnock  drafted the affidavit in support of the 
search warrant application  for the house but  he did not go to the house on July 11, 
remaining  instead at the station to attempt to interview the Appellant  when he arrived .  26 
 (R.Ex. 28)   He interviewed Ms. A at the PPD on July 12.  (R.Ex. 2 4)  Det. Warnock  is 
not a bomb squad technician ; he believed that Ms. A believed the explosives belonged to 
the Appellant because “she knew they weren’t hers and  she knew they weren’t her son[‘ s] 
….”  (R.Ex. 24, p. 10) .   Det. W arnock  added that “[t]he reason we charged [the 
Appellant]  with receiving stolen property is because MSP Bomb Squad determined that it 
was United States Army issued ordinance and there was no legal justification or legal 
means for him to obtain these other than s tealing them ….”  (Id.)  Det. W arnock  did not 
know if anyone, other than Ms. A and her son A  and the Appellant and his daughter, had 
access to the shed in the back yard of the Plymouth house.  ( Id. at 9, 10 and 12)     
70. PPD Det. R was involved in executi ng the warrant for the explosives at the Plymouth 
house.  He stated briefly, before the interview recorder stopped working, that he was 
informed at roll call that Ms. A had called the PPD to report explosives in the house that 
she believed belonged to the Appellant but he did not speak with any of the inhabitants of 
the Plymouth house, if any were present when he arrived.  He collected and photographed 
all of the evidence that he could  except that the State Police Bomb Squad took the 
explosives.  (R.Ex. 26,  p. 6)   
71. Sgt. Det. Rosado’s summary of her interview with PPD Sgt. Vecchi  states that when 
he asked Ms. A who the explosives belonged to, Ms. A said “I think they belong to Kirk 
Merricks.”  (R.Ex. 28 , p. 5 )  However, PPD Sgt. Vecchi test ified at the Commission 
hearing that he does not recall telling Sgt. Rosado that the Appellant’s wife said ‘I think 
those are the Appellant’s’ explosives.  (Testimony of Vecchi)  Given Sgt. Vecchi’s 
lengthy experience as a police officer, his military experience , his experience with 
explosives,  his detailed conversation with Ms. A on July 11 at the house, his detailed 27 
 incident report written on July 12 (R.Ex. 10),  his consistent testimony, and that Sgt. 
Rosado’s summary of his interview was based on her subjective notes and not a 
recording, I find Sgt. Vecchi ’s testimony in this regard more  credible.  Sgt. Rosado 
reported that she a sked PPD Sgt. Vecchi if the steel box in the master bedroom closet or 
the brief case in the shed “contained anything that cou ld connect Kir k Merricks or anyone 
else to th e explosives, he replied no .”  (R.Ex. 28, p. 7) (emphasis added)    
72. Lt. Det. McEachern and Sgt. Rosado  interviewed the Appellant on March 26, 2015 
for twenty -five (25) minutes and on October 13, 2015 for ten (10) minutes.  The 
Appellant was represented by counsel at both of the BPD  interviews.  At the March 26, 
2015 interview12, the Appellant repeatedly den ied owning the explosives found at the 
Plymouth house and stated that he did not know to whom they belonged.  He denied 
knowing that there were explosives in the house.  He denied that Ms. A asked him about 
the briefcase containing “military stuff” and telling her that he got rid of it.   He denied 
owning the briefcase in which some explosives were found at the shed in the backyard of 
the Plymouth house.  He did not have explosives training at  the BPD, nor did he respond 
to any calls or have any involvement with cases involving explosives.  He d id not have 
access to explosives through the BPD or another agency.  The only explosives training he 
received in the military was the regular familiariz ation everyone receives in the Marines.  
As a truck driver in the Army Nationa l Guard, he did not transport explosives, which 
requires a special license endorsement that he did not have.  He denied taking any 
explosives home  from the military.  He asserted  that the only things in the backyard shed 
                                                           
12 Sgt. Rosado’s report states that the Appellant invoked his Fifth Amendments right against self -incrimination 
twice: once when arrested by PPD in relation to the explosives found a t the Plymouth house and a second time in his 
March 26, 2015 BPD interview concerning the explosives.  It appears that the Appellant invoked his Fifth 
Amendment right only when he was arrested by PPD.  (R.Ex. 28, pp. 12, 13, 25 and 27)   The Appellant also invoked 
his Sixth Amendment right to counsel when he was arrested by the PPD.  (R.Ex. 32, p. 36)  28 
 were “junk” that wouldn’t fit in the basement  and things like  campi ng gear, Ms. A’s  
father’s  things , and military backpacks.   He stated that Ms. A has two (2) sons who have 
lived in the Plymouth house; one of th e sons enlisted in 2013 prior to the divorce but he 
did not know when the other son enlisted .   Before  the explosives were found at the 
house, his marriage was breaking up.  The Appellant stated, “I got caught cheating twice 
…”(R.Ex. 25 , p. 18);  he found that money was missing from their bank  account so he had 
his paycheck deposited into another .  (Id., p. 19); he lived in the Plymouth house for three 
(3) years; and when Ms. A’s 209A order ended, he believed that she wrote an affidavit 
for his da ughter to obtain a restraining order against him.   (R.Ex. 25 ; R.Ex. 32 , pp. 63 and 
99) 
73. The Appellant’s second interview was conducted on October 13, 2015 .  At that ten 
(10)-minute interview, the  Appellant  was represented by counsel.  T he Appellant 
declined to sign a form asserting his right to remain silent13.  (R.Ex. 27, p. 6)  He stated 
that he lived at the Plymouth house for six (6) or seven (7) years ( Id., p. 7).   Asked if he 
was living at the Plymouth house when he and Ms. A were engaged, the Appellant 
answered, “[b]ack and forth.  You know, I still had to live in Boston.”  ( Id.)  When he left 
the Plymouth house in May 2013 , he left his belongings there.  ( Id., p. 9)   When asked, 
with respect to the explosives at the Plymouth  house, if he never possessed th em at the 
Plymouth house, the Appellant stated that he did not.  (Id., pp. 10 – 13, 15)  He denied 
recognizing the briefcase in the shed in which explosives were found.  ( Id., p. 11)  He 
denied recognizing or owning the stee l box containing explosives that was recovered 
from the master  bedroom at the Plymouth house .  (Id., p. 13; see also  R.Ex. 12 )  He  
admitted that the rifle shells found in the BPD evidence bag in side the steel box belonged 
                                                           
13 See Michael P. Carney v. City of Springfield & others , 403 Mass. 604 (1988).  29 
 to him but it did not make any sense to him that  there were some rifle shells in the BPD 
evidence bag when photos of the evidence showed that approximately half of the rifle 
shell holder on the mantel in the man cave was empty.14  (Id., pp. 14, 19 and 20 ; see also  
R.Ex. 12 ).  The Appellant denied knowing how the BPD evidence bag wound up in side 
the steel box in the bedroom.  ( Id.;  see also  R.Ex. 12)  The Appellant stated that other 
BPD officers  use BPD evidence bags in their duty bags, for example.  (Id., p. 17)    
74. Lt. Det. McEachern oversaw Sgt. Rosado’s investigation.  He became aware of this 
matter when he was assigned to ACD, which was monitoring the Appellant’s criminal 
court case.  Since Lt. Det. McEachern transferred from ACD to Internal Affairs when the 
Appellant’s ca se went to Internal Affairs and Sgt. Rosado was new to the Internal Affairs 
Division at the time, Lt. Det. McEachern became more involved in the investigation.  
(R.Ex. 32 (p. 63 )  Lt. Det. McEachern previously served in the U.S. Air Force but he did 
not wo rk with explosives, he is not familiar with explosives, but he knows they are 
secured on a military base.  (R.Ex. 32, pp. 86 -89)  
75. The original charges against the Appellant relating to the explosives were for 
violations of BPD rules concerning conduct unbecoming of an officer and conformance 
to laws.  After the BPD’s first interview of the Appellant, the BPD added to these charges 
a charge that the Appellant had been untruthful .  (R.Ex. 27, p. 22)  
76. Sgt. Rosado’s Internal Affairs report references the 209A restraining order obtained 
by Ms. A against the Appellant but does not report that the order was ended at Ms. A’s 
request a couple of weeks after it was issued  and that Ms. A’s initial overni ght request for 
a 209A order was denied .  (R.Ex. 28; Administrative Notice)   The report mentions that 
Ms. A found the explosives on July 6, 2013 and that she did not notify the PPD of the 
                                                           
14 At the Commission hearing, the Appellant specifically denied putting the rifle shells in the BPD evidence bag.   30 
 explosives until July 11, 2013 but the report does not indicate the reason for Ms. A’s 
delayed reporting  after son A told her he they were not safe .  The report does not mention 
that Ms. A reported she spoke to her attorney before calling the PPD about the 
explosives. (R.Ex. 28; Administrative Notice)  The report notes that people other than the 
Appellant had access to the backyard shed and that it appeared that Ms. A had been  
“funneling the families’ funds into her separate account un beknownst to him.”  (R.Ex. 28, 
p. 5)  The report  indicates that Sgt. Rosad o had sent multiple certified letters to Ms. A in 
February 2015 to interview her regarding the explosives, at least some of which letters 
were returned.  (R.Ex. 28, p. 12)   In June 2015, Sgt. Rosad o sent additional certified 
letters to Ms. A, son A and son B which were either returned or to which there was no 
response.   (R.Ex. 28)    
77. Lt. Det. McEachern recommended that all complaints against the Appellant be 
sustained.  (R.Ex. 32 (Testimony of McEachern at BPD hearing) , pp. 82 -84).15  Most  of 
the d ocuments that he saw in this matter indicated that the explosives were unstable, 
which he understood “to mean that they were capable of exploding.”  (R.Ex. 32, p. 86)   
He also knew that State Police detonated some of the explosives offsite.  (R.Ex . 32)      
78. Lt. Det. McEachern discussed this investigation “in depth” with Sgt. Rosado , who 
appears to have indicated, at a minimum, that she could go either way on a 
recommendation to sustain the complaints against the Appellant.  Ultimately, it appea rs, 
Lt. Det. McEachern thought that Sgt. Rosado “agrees that we have a 51 percent”, that is, 
that the BPD had established that it was more likely than not that the Appellant violated 
the cited BPD rules .  (R.Ex. 32, p. 84) 
                                                           
15 There does not appear to be a document in the record from Lt. Det. McEachern reporting his recommendation to 
sustain the complaints against the Appellant.  31 
 79.  By memo dated January 11, 2016, to Commissioner Evans, Dep. Supt. Walcott 
submitted an Internal Affairs Division recommendation that the charges of conduct 
unbecoming (Rule 102, § 3), untruthfulness (Rule 102, § 23) and conformance to laws 
(five (5) cou nts) (Rule 102, § 35) be sustained.  (R.Ex. 29)  
80. Rule 102, § 23 provides , 
Employees shall submit all necessary reports on time and in accordance with 
established Departmental procedures. Reports submitted by employees shall be 
truthful and complete. No employee shall knowingly enter, or cause to be entered, 
any inaccurate, false or improper information.  
 (R.Ex. 29)  
 
81. Also regarding truthfulness, Police Commissioner’s Memo, Number CM 10 -007, 
dated January 20, 2010, marked “Post/Mention: Indefinite ”, with the subject title: 
“Disciplinary Policy Statement”, and signed by then -Commissioner Davis, states,  
The following statement is issued in an effort to put employees on notice that 
untruthfulness will not be tolerated by the Department. When an officer is found 
to be untruthful, it damages the officer’s ability to testify in future court 
proceedings. Testifying in court is a fundamental job requirement for a police 
officer, and therefore it is essential that an officer’s integrity and credibility are 
intact. Should the Department determine that an employee has been untruthful in 
any report to the Department, during any sworn testimony or in an internal 
investigatory interview including interviews at Internal Affairs and Anti -
Corruption, termination will b e the presumptive disciplinary action, consistent 
with just cause principles. This policy will be effective immediately.16  
(R.Ex. 39)  
 
82. By letter dated August 31, 2016, Commissioner Evans notified the Appellant that he 
was contemplating disciplinary act ion against him including, but not limited to discharge, 
reduction in rank or suspension, in connection with the Internal Affairs Division case 
relating to the explosi ves found at the Plymouth house, and that a hearing would be held 
                                                           
16 The Appellant was given a copy of this policy prior to the beginning of each of the three (3) interviews conducted 
by the BPD of the Appellant in this case.  (R.Exs. 4, 25 and 27)  32 
 in those regards on Sep tember 16, 2016.   Attached to the letter were copies of G.L. c. 31, 
§§ 41-45 and eight (8) specifications:  
I – conduct unbecoming for being indicted for possession of explosives and 
receiving stolen property;  
 
II - untruthfulness for being untruthful at his IAD interview, denying having any 
knowledge of the explosives at the house he had shared with Ms. A; 
 
III  - conformance to laws for being arrested after the explosives were located at 
the Plymouth house in a brie fcase in the shed “which [Ms.  A] identified as 
belonging to P.O.  Merricks, in violation of G.L. c. 266, § 102 (possession of 
explosives) ; 
 
IV  - conformance to laws for being arrested after explosives w ere found in a 
metal box in the bedro om at the Plymou th house , which box also contained a 
BPD evidence bag, in violation of G.L. c. 266, § 102; 
 
V   - conformance to laws for being arrested after military grade TNT boosters 
were located at the Plymouth house in the metal box in the bedroom, which were 
obtain able only by theft or receipt after the theft, in violation of G.L. c. 266, § 60; 
 
VI  - conformance to laws for being arrested and charged with receiving stolen 
property (four (4) military grenades) found in the shed at the Plymouth house, 
which were obta inable only by theft or receipt after the theft, in violation of G.L. 
c. 266, § 60; 
 
VII  -  conformance to laws for being arrested and charged with receiving stolen 
property over $2 50  (two (2) lengths of time fuse with igniters) found in the shed 
at the Plymouth house, in violation of G.L. c. 266, § 60; 
 
VIII  - conformance to laws for being arrested and charged with receiving stolen 
property three (3) lengths of explosive detonator ch ord) found in the shed at the 
Plymouth house, which were obtainable only by theft or receipt after theft, in 
violation of G.L. c. 266, § 60. 
(R.Ex. 31)  
 
83. At the September 16, 2016 BPD disciplinary hearing  regarding the explosives , the 
only witnesses who testified were PPD Officer Warnock  and BPD L t. McEachern.  The 33 
 Appellant was represented by counsel at the disciplinary hearing .  The Appellant did not 
testify  at that hearing .17  (R.Ex s. 32 and 33 ; Administrative Notice)     
84. PPD Det. W arnock  testified  at the September 16, 2016 BPD hearing regarding the 
explosives , in part : 
he has received basic and advanced interrogation training to assess witness 
credibility but  he could not recall when he received that training;  
 
he believed th at Ms. A was credible when he interviewed her but he did not 
explain the reasons he found her credible other than to say that  she was calm  even 
though she was concerned about the explosives at her home ; 
 
he has no military experience or experience with explosives ;  
 
he had  no knowledge about the Appellant’s  military duties or training;   
  
he wrote t he search warrant affidavit based on information he obtained  from other 
police officers who obtained  it from the people who live d at the Plymouth house;  
 
he did not know when the Appellant had left the house;  
 
he found out shortly  before the BPD September 2016 hearing that the disk 
recording of Ms. A’s July 12, 2013 interview was destroyed after the criminal 
court case ended pursuant to PPD policy and the ori ginal recording was damaged 
or destroyed when aspects of the recording system were changed;  
 
he never saw the explosives in person – only in photographs;  
 
he did not know who owned the house ; and  
 
he did not know if the explosives were  from  a military base where the Appellant 
had been assigned.    
(R.Ex. 32 , pp. 29-61)   
 
                                                           
17 At the prehearing conference in this case, the parties st ipulated that the Appellant testified at the BPD disciplinary 
hearings.  (Administrative Notice)  The Appellant testified at the disciplinary hearing concerning the 209A order 
against the Appellant (R.Ex.  8) but not at the hearing concerning the explosives  found at the Plymouth house  
(R.Exs. 32 and 33).  34 
 85. Lt. Det. McEachern  testified at the September 2016 BPD hearing .  Asked if there’s 
any evidence to connect the Appellant to the explosives found in the bedroom, he state d 
that the metal box found in the bedroom that contained  explosives also contained a BPD 
evidence bag with rounds of rifle ammunition in it (for the rifle  that the Appellant was 
fixing ) which ammunition the Appellant admitted was his; there were explosives in a 
briefcase in the shed, and Ms. A had told  PPD that the briefcase with explosives in it 
belonged to the Appellant .  (R.Ex. 32, p . 76)  At the BPD hearing , Lt. Det. McEachern 
also stated , in pertinent part , that :  
the BPD attempted to interview Ms. A and sons A and B about the explosives but 
they were unable to do so  (R.Ex. 32, p. 67) ;  
 
the BPD was n ot able to determine how recently  son B had lived at the Plymouth 
house  (Id., at 70 -71);  
 
the BPD found that son A had not been deployed overseas ( Id. at 72);  
 
he was unable to reach  son A’s  superior officer to verify whether son A had 
access to explosives  (Id.);    
 
he called NCIS and spoke to Special Agent R to find out if son B had access to 
explosives and had been deployed oversees and the Special Agent told him that 
son B was an aircraft technician , which job does  not have access to explosives , 
and that son B was stationed  on an aircraft carrier but was not deployed overseas  
  (Id. at 73-124);   
 
he has never seen a report from the State Police lab indicating that the explosives 
found at the Plymouth house were capable of exploding  although he knows that 
several of the explosives were detonated by the State Police .  (R.Ex. 32, pp. 86 -
87); and  
 
he did not “have any direct evidence or overwhelming evidence how [the 
Appellant] came into contact with [the explosives] or possession of them.”   
(R.Ex. 32, p. 92)  
 35 
 86. On January 23, 2017, Dep. Supt. Lydon issued his hearing officer report regarding the 
September 16, 2016 hearing.  The report concludes  that the BPD established by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the Appellant violated the rules cited in the eight (8) 
Specifications against him  for possessing and receiving stolen explosives based on its 
finding that Ms. A stated that the briefcase co ntaining explosives in the shed belonged to 
the Appellant ;  the metal box containing explosives in the bedroom closet, which 
included a BPD evidence bag containing some ammunition that the Appellant identified 
as his, belonged to the Appellant;  the Appell ant was untruthful when he denied th at these 
items belong ed to him ;  it was likely that the person who came into contact with the 
explosives  was someone (like the Appellant) who had been in the military at the time that 
at least some of the explosives were  manufactured; the only way to come into possession 
of the explosives is to steal them or receive them after they were stolen;  the Appellant 
was indicted   for possession of the stolen explosives and the charges were dismissed 
without prejudice , indicating that the Appellant could still  be subject to prosecution ;  the 
Appellant could be subject to future prosecution  if Ms. A is willing to testify or other 
information becomes available ;  the Appellant asserted his 5th Amendment rights and 
refused to be inter viewed by the PPD immediately prior to his arrest; and the Appellant 
did not testify at the BPD hearing.  (R.Ex. 33)    
87. Dep. Supt. Lydon’s report  does not indicate , in part,  that, 
the BPD investigators had not met Ms. A and did not interview her by phone or in 
person regarding the explosives because Ms. A did not make herself available ;    
 
PPD Officer W arnock  conducted the interview of Ms. A’s son A by phone, there 
does not appear to be a PPD record documenting the phone c all, and son A’s 
superior officer did not provide a written statement as requested by the BPD or 36 
 PPD investigators indicating whether or not son A had access to explosives at his 
military base;   
 
PPD Sgt. Vecchi reported that, from his military experience with explosives, the 
explosives appeared to be stable  and the State Police Bomb Squad stated that 
some of them were unstable  for purposes of long term storage with the State 
Police and were detona ted at another location;   
 
when BPD investigators asked PPD Sgt. Vecchi  if anything was found with the 
explosives that “could connect Kirk Merricks or anyone else to the explosives”, 
he said no; (R.Ex. 28, p. 7)  and that Lt. Det. McEachern testified at th e BPD 
hearing  that he did not have “direct” or “overwhelming” evidence indicating how 
the Appellant obtained them  (R.Ex. 32, p. 92);      
                        
the BPD Internal Affairs Division investigation report states that the interviews of 
the Appellant and PPD Det. W arnock , and part of the interview of PPD Det. R ,  
were recorded but the interviews of PPD Det. J and PPD Sgt. Vecchi, who  were  
involve d at the scene, were not recorded because of a recorder malfunction and 
that the report relied on the interviewer’ s subjective notes of  the interviews  
instead ; and 
ATF reported that the explosives had not been reported lost or stolen  and there 
was no indication if the explosives were sent the bases to which the Appellant had 
been assigned . 
 (R.Ex s. 10, 14, 17, 18, 24 -28, 32 and 33; Administrative Notice )(emphasis added)  
 
88.  By letter dated January 27, 2017, Commissioner Evans informed the Appellant that 
he sustained the charges against him in IAD Case No. 2014 -0611 (regarding the 
explosives), which was the subject of a hearing on September 16, 2016 , following which 
the hearing officer found just cause to discipline him the Appellant for one (1) violation 
of Rule 102, § 3 (Conduct Unbecoming), one (1) violation of Rule 102, § 23 
(Untruthfulness), and six (6) violations of Rule 102, § 35 (Conformance to Laws) .  The 
same letter informed the Appellant that Commissioner Evans sustained the findings of the 
hearing officer of the  December 29, 2016 hearing , who found just cause to discipline the 
Appellative relative to IAD Case No. 2013 -0224  (regarding the 209A order ) for one (1) 37 
 violation of Rule 102, § 3 (Conduct Unbecoming) .  Having sustained the hearing 
officer’s findings in bo th cases, Commissioner Evans terminated the Appellant’s 
employment.   (R.Ex. 34)  
89. The Appellant’s previous discipline is as follows:  
January 2008 – five (5) -day suspension.  The Appellant called in sick for the 
eleventh time that year and failed to consult a physician for “his alleged illness, he 
submitted a report that did not indicate the necessity of his absence” on one date; 
in addition, the Appellant hired a civilian to remove debris from his property on 
another date but the checks paid to the w orker were not honored by the bank and 
the Appellant did not repay the worker in a timely manner; the Appellant did not 
notify his commanding officer of a criminal complaint against him in regard to 
the failure to timely pay the worker at his house (R.Ex. 38); and  
 
August 2008 – fifteen (15) -day suspension although the Appellant was 
reimbursed for twelve (12) days in a subsequent settlement.  The Appellant was 
“ordered to complete a report for an apparent Assault & Battery with a Dangerous 
Weapon.  Officer  Merricks refused to comply with this order. …”  (R. Ex. 37; see 
also R.Ex. 36)  
 
Applicable Legal Standards  
 A tenured civil service employee may be discharged for “just cause” after due notice and  
hearing upon written decision “which shall state fully and  specifically the reasons therefore.”  
G.L. c. 31, § 41.  An employee aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the Commission. G.L. c. 
31, § 43. Under section 43, the appointing authority carries burden to prove to the Commission 
by a “preponderance of the e vidence” that there was “just cause” for the action taken. Id. See, 
e.g., Falmouth v. Civil Serv. Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006); Police Dep’t of Boston v. 
Collins , 48 Mass.App.Ct. 411, rev.den ., 726 N.E.2d 417 (2000).  In performing its function:  
“. . .the commission does not view a snapshot of what was before the appointing  
authority . . . the commission hears evidence and finds facts anew. . . . [after] a  
hearing de novo upon all material evidence and . . . not merely for a review of the  
previous hear ing held before the appointing officer. There is no limitation of the  
evidence to that which was before the appointing officer. . . . For the commission,  38 
 the question is . . . “whether, on the facts found by the commission, there was  
reasonable justificati on for the action taken by the appointing authority in the  
circumstances found by the commission to have existed when the appointing  
authority made its decision.”  Leominster v. Stratton , 58 Mass.App.Ct. 726, 727 -28 (2003) 
(quoting Watertown v. Arria , 16 Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983)(emphasis added)).   
 
See also  Falmouth v. Civil Serv. Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823; Cambridge v. Civil Serv. 
Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 300, 303 -05, rev.den ., 428 Mass. 1102 (1997).  
 An action is “justified” if it is "done upon adequ ate reasons sufficiently supported by  
credible evidence, when weighed by an unprejudiced mind; guided by common sense and by  
correct rules of law." Commissioners of Civil Service v. Municipal Ct. of Boston , 359 Mass.  
211, 214 (1971); Cambridge v. Civil Ser vice Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 300, 304, rev.den ., 426  
Mass. 1102 (1997); Selectmen of Wakefield v. Judge of First Dist. Ct. , 262 Mass. 477, 482  
22 (1928).  The Commission must take account of all credible evidence in the entire 
administrative record, inclu ding whatever would fairly detract from the weight of any particular 
supporting evidence. See, e.g.,  Massachusetts Ass’n of Minority Law Enforcement Officers v. 
Abban , 434 Mass. 256, 264 -65 (2001). It is the purview of the hearing officer to determine 
credibility of testimony presented to the Commission. “[T]he assessing of the credibility of 
witnesses is a preserve of the [commission] upon which a court conducting judicial review treads 
with great reluctance.”  Leominster v. Stratton , 58 Mass.App.Ct. 726, 729 (2003).  See Embers 
of Salisbury, Inc. v. Alcoholic Beverages Control Comm’n , 401 Mass. 526, 529 (1988); Doherty 
v. Retirement Bd. of Medford , 425 Mass. 130, 141 (1997). See also  Covell v. Dep’t of Social 
Services , 439 Mass. 766, 787 (2003)(where live witnesses gave conflicting testimony at an  
agency hearing, a decision relying on an assessment of their relative credibility cannot be made  
by someone who was not present at the hearing) .          39 
 “The Commission is permitted, but not required, to draw an adverse inference against an 
appellant who fails to testify at the hearing before the appointing authority (or before the 
Commission). Town of Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm'n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2 006).”  Clark v. 
Boston Housing Authority , 24 MCSR 193 (2011), Clark v. Boston Housing Authority , Suffolk 
Superior Court, C.A. No. SUCV2011 -2554E, aff’d (Feb. 13, 2015).  In a civil case, the 
Massachusetts courts have held that even a party asserting his or  her rights against self -
incrimination under the U.S. or Massachusetts Constitutions “may be the subject of a nega tive 
inference by a fact finder  where the opposing party … has established a case adverse to the 
person invoking the privilege. Quintal v. Commissioner of the Dep’t of Employment & Training , 
418 Mass. 855, 861 (1994), quoting Custody of Two Minors , 396 Mass. 610, 616 (1986).”  
Town of Falmouth , at 826 -27 (citations omitted).  While the adverse inference may not be 
required, in Town of  Falmout h, the Supreme Judicial Court found that the Commission erred 
when it failed to factor into its decision to reduce the Appellant’s suspension from 180 days to 60 
days that the Appellant failed to testify at the Town’s hearing, invoking the privilege agains t self -
incrimination.   Id.   Finally, a n adverse  inference “cannot alone  meet the plaintiff’s burden.  See 
McGinnis v. Aetna Life & Casualty Co ., [398 Mass. 37, 39 (1986)].”  Frizado v. Frizado , 420 
Mass. 592, 596 (1995)(emphasis added).   
 The Commission determines justification for discipline by inquiring, “whether the 
employee has been guilty of substantial misconduct which adversely affects the public interest 
by impairing the efficiency of public service.” School Comm. v. Civil Service C omm’n , 43 
Mass.App. Ct. 486, 488, rev.den ., 426 Mass. 1104 (1997); Murray v. Second Dist. Ct ., 389 Mass. 
508, 514 (1983).  The Commission is guided by “the principle of uniformity and the ‘equitable  
treatment of similarly situated individuals’ [both within  and across different appointing  40 
 authorities]” as well as the “underlying purpose of the civil service system ‘to guard against  
political considerations, favoritism and bias in governmental employment decisions.’ ” Town of  
Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 (2006) and cases cited.  It is also a basic  
tenet of the “merit principle” which governs Civil Service Law that discipline must be remedial,  
not punitive, designed to “correct inadequate performance” and “separating employees whose  
inadequate performance cannot be corrected.” G.L. c. 31, §1.  
 Police are held to a high standard of conduct, as the Commission found in the recent 
decision in Zorzi v. Town of Norwood , Docket No. D -15-111.  In Zorzi , the Commission noted,  
“An officer of the law carries the burden of being expected to comport himself or herself 
in an exemplary fashion.” McIssac v. Civil Service Comm’n , 38 Mass.App.Ct. 473,475 
1995)(negligent off -duty handling of firearm).   When it comes to police officers, the law 
teaches that there is a special ‘trust reposed in [a police officer] by reason of his 
employment ….  Police officers must comport themselves in accordance with the laws 
that they are sworn to enforce and behave in a manner that brings honor and res pect for 
rather than public distrust of law enforcement personnel.  They are required to do more 
than refrain from indictable conduct. Police officers are not drafted into public service; 
rather they compete for their positions.  In accepting employment by  the public, they 
implicitly agree that they will not engage in conduct which calls into question their ability 
and fitness to perform their official responsibilities.’ Police Comm’r v. Civil Service 
Comm’n , 22 Mass.App.Ct. 364, 371, rev.den.,  398 Mass. 11 03 (1986).”  
 
This standard of conduct extends, of course, to truthfulness.  In Gonzalves v. Falmouth , 25 
MCSR 231 (2012), Gonsalves v. Civil Service Commission and Town of Falmouth , Suffolk   
Superior Court, C.A. No. 12 -2655G (2014) aff’d , the Commission a rticulated the importance of 
an officer’s obligation to be truthful in that case and as established previously, stating,  
“The most serious charge proved against Officer Gonsalves involved his untruthfulness. 
He left a trail of evasive, incredible and incon sistent statements that began on December 
20, 2008, with his original denial to the Oscar 11 Officer that he had pulled 27 into the 
Granite City Electric parking lot while the officer and Ms. A were meeting. It continued 
through the FPD investigation and w as on display during his two days of testimony at the 
hearing before the Commission. On these grounds, alone, Falmouth is fully justified to 
terminate a police officer who repeatedly demonstrates his inability to tell the truth. See 41 
 City of Cambridge v. Ci vil Service Comm’n , 43 Mass. 300, 303 (1997)(‘The city was 
hardly espousing a position devoid of reason when it held that a demonstrated willingness 
to fudge the truth in exigent circumstances was a doubtful characteristic for a police 
officer. . . . It re quires no strength of character to speak the truth when it does not hurt.’) 
See also  Phillips v. Town of Hingham , 24 MCSR 267 (2011)(police officer terminated 
for untruthfulness about inappropriate “horseplay” with civilian employee while on duty); 
Desharn ais v. City of Westfield , 23 MCSR 418 (2010)(officer damaged cruiser in 
“cowboyish” spins and then untruthfully denied his antics); Mozeleski v. Chicopee , 21 
MCSR 676 (2008)(lying to cover -up inappropriate conduct during a late -night traffic 
stop); Rizzo v . Town of Lexington , 21 MCSR 634 (2008)(police officer failed to report 
use of force and later misrepresented level of force used); Layne v. Town of Tewksbury , 
20 MCSR 372 (2007)(police officer denied using profanity directed to accident victims).”  
 
 G.L. c. 31, § 43 also vests the Commission with authority to affirm, vacate or modify a 
penalty imposed by the appointing authority. The Commission is delegated with “considerable 
discretion” in this regard, albeit “not without bounds” so long as the Commi ssion provides a 
rational explanation for how it has arrived at its decision to do so.  See e.g ., Police Comm’r v. 
Civil Service Comm’n , 39 Mass.App.Ct. 594, 600 (1996) and cases cited; Falmouth v. Civil 
Service Comm’n , 61 Mass.App.Ct. 796, 800 (2004); Faria v. Third Bristol Div. , 14 
Mass.App.Ct. 985, 987 (1982)(remanded for findings to support modification) .  However, the 
Supreme Judicial Court has added,  
“Unless the commission’s findings of fact differ significantly from those reported by the 
town or int erpret the relevant law in a substantially different way, the absence of political 
considerations, favoritism, or bias would warrant essentially the same penalty. ” 
Town of Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm'n , 447 Mass. 81 5, 824. 
 
Analysis  
The Respondent has established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that it had just 
cause to discipline the Appellant  for violation of the BPD R ule 102, § 3, concerning conduct 
unbecoming an offi cer, when, during a  loud and bitter domestic argument on May 31, 2013, Ms. 
A locked herself in the bathroom to call  the PPD for help and the Appellant  kicked the bathroom 42 
 door, causing damage to the d oor.  PPD officers arrived at the Merricks’ residence and arranged 
for the Appellant to leave the residence and  go to work  at the BP D.  Later the same night, Ms. A 
called  the PPD again, this time seeking a restraining order out of fear  that the Appellant would 
cause further damage if he was allowed to return to the house  after his shift ended the following 
morning.  Although the initia l request for a restraining order  was denied by an on -call judge on 
May 31, the PPD subsequently reviewed the matter and interviewed Ms. A at the Plymouth 
police station and advised her to go to court to request a restraining order.  The court issued an  ex 
parte order on June 4, 2013 but it ended at Ms. A’s request when both parties appeared before the 
court approximately ten (10) days or so later when the Appellant indicated that he would not 
return to the house.  While both the Appellant and Ms. A were  yelling during this argument, the 
Appellant’s conduct in kickin g and breaking the bathroom door  when Ms. A was in the 
bathroom , trying to call the police for assistance, crossed the line .  Although the BPD was unable 
to obtain the PPD’s recorded interview  of Ms. A and photos of the damage to the bathroom door , 
it interviewed Ms. A by phone, the Appellant did not deny his conduct when BPD investigators 
interviewed him about it or when he testified at the BPD hearing regarding the restraining order.  
The App ellant’s  behavior le d to the involvement of multiple members of the PPD  and the court , 
who learned in the course of their duties, that the Appellant was a member of the BPD . Such 
conduct reflects unfavorably on the BPD in violation of the BPD Rule 102, § 3 regarding 
conduct unbecoming an officer  and the Respondent had just cause to discipline the Appellant 
therefor .   
The Respondent has not established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that it had just 
cause to discipline the Appellant for violation of  BPD rules in connection with the explosives 
found at his Plymouth residence.  Even drawing an adverse inference here from the Appellant’s 43 
 failure to testify at the Respondent’s hearing does not establish by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the Appella nt engaged in the misconduct alleged in connection with the 
explosives.18   See citations and discussion in Applicable Legal Standards section, supra , 
including Town of Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm'n , 447 Mass. 814, 823 , 826 -27 (2006) ; 
Clark v. Boston Housing Authority , 24 MCSR 193 (2011), Clark v. Boston Housing Authority , 
Suffolk Superior Court, C.A. No. SUCV2011 -2554E, aff’d (Feb. 13, 2015) ; Quintal v. 
Commissioner of the Dep’t of Employment & Training , 418 Mass. 855, 861 (1994), quoting 
Custody of Two Minors , 396 Mass. 610, 616 (1986); McGinnis v. Aetna Life & Casualty Co ., 
398 Mass. 37, 39 (1986); and  Frizado v. Frizado , 420 Mass. 592, 596 (1995).                      
In rendering its decision to discipline the Appellant, the Respondent relied  on a hearing 
officer’s report that relied on a State Police report,  the Appellant’s indictment,  the reports and/or 
statements of various members of the PPD, reports, the BPD corruption  report , the internal 
affairs report and interviews of the Appellant .  The Commission gives considerable credence to 
police reports that are, for example, detailed, corroborated by eyewitnesses, and timely -made.  
See Abbot A. v. Commonwealth , 458 Mass. 24, 35 -36 (2010).  However,  the Respondent ’s 
investigators were  unable to interview Ms. A  by phone or in writing  regarding the explosives  to 
corroborate her statements reported by the PPD ; they  did not obtain or have access to the PPD 
audio -visual recording  of Ms.  A’s interview  regarding the  explosives; they conducted in-person 
interviews of the PPD Officers Warnock, R, J and Sgt. Vecchi, only some  of which interviews 
were  recorded because of a faulty recorder, and summaries of their interviews were based on the 
interviewers’ notes , which are always subject t o the author’s subjective views .     
The Respondent’s hearing officer’s report  on which Commissioner Evans relied, either 
ignored or gave little weight to other, highly significant information.  For example, the hearing 
                                                           
18 The Respondent’s post -hearing brief does not reference taking an adverse inference in this regard.  44 
 officer did not mention that the PPD had recorded its interview of Ms. A about the explosives but 
the BPD was unable to obtain a copy of the recording and that no member of the BPD had ever 
met Ms. A  to verify remarks attributed to her  concerning the explosives .  Next, the hearing 
officer failed to note that even though the PPD asked the State Police for a fingerprint a nalysis of 
the seized evidence, the State Police declined, stating that it would be unsafe to do so  and, thus, 
there we re no fingerprints identifying the person/s who come in contact with the evidence .  In 
addition, the hearing officer did not note that the ATF indicated  that there was no report t hat the 
explosives found at the Plymouth house had been lost or stolen  or tha t the manufacturer had sent 
them to military sites where the Appellant had served .  Further,  the hearing officer did not note 
that Lt. Det. McEachern testified at the local hearing that he did not have any direct evidence 
how the Appellant could have obtained the explosives (R.Ex. 32, p. 92) and that Sgt. Rosado ’s 
report  indicated that PPD Sgt. Vecchi made a similar statement  (R.Ex. 2 8, p. 7 ).  The 
Respondent’s hearing officer’s report also ignored or gave little weight to the information that 
even though Ms. A and son A reportedly found the explosives on July 6, 2013, Ms. A waited 
until July 11, 2013 (after son A had returned to his m ilitary assignment and Mrs. A had phoned 
her attorney) to report the explosives  to the PPD .  Apparently, no one at the PPD thought to ask 
Ms. A this important question.  Also given inadequate consideration was the fact that the 
backyard shed in which some explosives were found was unlocked  so that  anyone who had 
access to the house would have access to the shed.  With regard to access, it was not determined 
at what dates Ms. A’s son B lived at the house to determine whether he was connected to the 
explosives.  Similarly,  the Respondent’s hearing officer report  does not note that Lt. Det. 
McEachern testified at the local hearing that he had never seen a report from the State Police lab 
indicating that the explosives we re capable of exploding, although he knew that several of the 45 
 explosives were detonated by the State Police.  R.Ex. 32, pp. 86 -87.  The hearing officer further 
ignored or gave inadequate weight to the fact that the Appellant’s occupation in the military di d 
not involve explosives and that he received the same limited basic training regarding explosives 
that other soldiers received.  Also, the BPD and PPD made efforts to discern if either of Ms. A’s 
sons had seen active military duty overseas, where they mig ht have access to explosives, or if 
they received explosives training.  The BPD was told “no” in both regards by son A’s superior 
officer and by NCIS regarding son B but they received no written confirmation in these regards 
and were apparently unable to s peak directly to the sons.      
Further, t he BPD hearing officer did not have additional significant information provided 
at the Commission hearing  including:  1) soldiers returning home from active military duty 
abroad are thoroughly checked to ensure tha t they are not taking anything they are not authorized 
to take ; and 2) PPD Sgt. Vecchi testified at the Commission that he did not agree with Sgt. 
Rosado’s report stating that he did not agree that Ms. A had told him the explosives belonged to 
the Appellan t.   In addition, the BPD hearing officer’s report provided no rational explanation for 
some of the Appellant’s rifle shells appearing in the BPD evidence bag in the metal box (which 
metal box did not belong to the Appellant) in the master bedroom closet when the rest of the rifle 
shells were in a half -empty holder on the mantel in the man cave.   
The BPD hearing officer’s report also provided limited insight into the context of the 
discovery of the explosives.  In the midst of a high ly contentious divorce, with the Appellant  
having been removed from the house and a restraining order issued weeks prior to discovery of 
the explosives, the visit of son A to the Plymouth house when the Appellant was no longer living 
there, and Ms. A’s fiv e (5)-day delay in reporting the explosives to the PPD (after son A had 46 
 returned to his military base and Ms. A had consulted her attorney), there were opportunities to 
tamper with the home and the evidence to implicate the Appellant.                  
The Respondent a lso states that another reason for sustaining the explosive charges 
against the Appellant is that  the criminal case against the Appellant could be re -opened since the 
case was dismissed without prejudice.   The criminal case was based on the ind ictment issued 
following Ms. A’s testimony to a grand jury.  However, since that time, Ms. A apparently 
departed the state and has been unresponsive to many efforts to speak to her and elicit her 
cooperation in re -opening the case.   
That the Respondent fa iled to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that it had just 
cause to discipline the Appellant does not mean that the Appellant’s testimony was not without 
its flaws.  For example, w hen talking to BPD investigators the first time, the Appellant st ated 
that he had only lived at the Plymouth house for three (3) years ( R.Ex. 25, p. 7) while at his 
second interview by BPD investigators, he stated that he had lived there for six (6) to seven (7) 
years ( R.Ex. 27, p. 7).  When BPD investigators asked him whether he lived in Boston or 
Plymouth, the Appellant stated that he lived in both, in view of the BPD residency requirement.  
In responding to BPD investigators’ questions about what happened on the night of May 31 after 
the PPD police arrived in response  to Ms. A’s call, the Appellant stated that he “just left the 
house ” when,  in fact, he did not “just leave” until the PPD police officers arrived in response to 
Ms. A’s 911 call and spoke with the Appellant and Ms. A.  R.Ex. 25, p. 17.  However, such 
incon sistencies do not materially affect this decision.   
The Respondent argued that the Appellant was untruthful in that he denied that the 
explosives belonged to him .  To this end, it essentially relied on the unverified, contested 
statements of a witness the Respondent has never met and the Appellant’s admission that 47 
 ammunition in a BPD evidence bag that belonged to him was found sitting in a metal box with 
explosives, which did not belong to him.   These reasons fall short of the preponderance of the 
evidence standard.         
The Commission finds that the Respondent established by a preponderance of the 
evidence that it had just cause to discipline the Appellant regarding the domestic violence rel ated 
charges but that the Respondent’s January 27, 2017 notice of termination letter (R.Ex. 34) simply 
states that the Appellant was terminated based on both the domestic violence related charges and 
the explosives related charges.  Since the Respondent ha s not established just cause for the 
explosives charges against the Appellant, a separate discipline for only the domestic violence 
related charge is warranted.  A review of Commission case law indicates that p olice officers and 
other public employees have  been terminated for domestic violence alone in especially grievous 
cases, when the have engaged in domestic violence on multiple occasions and /or in connection 
with other misconduct.  See, e.g.  Hatfield v. Town of Hull F ire Department , D1-15-121 (2016); 
Tobias v. City of Newton , 22 MCSR 661 (2009); Weinrebe v. Department of Correction , 20 
MCSR 651 (2007); Venuto v. Town of Braintree , 26 MCSR 390  (2013); Lavery v. North 
Attle borough , 30 MCSR 373  (2017); Torres v. City of Chicopee , 30 MCSR 467  (2017); Alice a 
v. City of Holyoke , 27 MCSR 150 (2014).  However, in a case involving a single, less egregious 
incident of domestic violence unaccompanied by other proved misconduct, the Commission has 
upheld a three (3) -day suspension.  Horner v. Department of Correcti on, 24 MCSR 405  (2011).   
In determining appropriate discipline regarding the Appellant’s domestic violence proved 
charge, I further considered the Appellant’s previous discipline.  The Appellant was disciplined 
twice in 2008, once for sick leave abuse and for issuing a check to so meone to remove debris 
from his property (a five (5) -day suspension) and a second time for a fifteen (15) -day suspension 48 
 for failing to complete a report as ordered for an apparent assault  and battery with a dangerous 
weapon (for which he was reimbursed tw elve (12) days).  Following progressive discipline, the 
Appellant shall be suspended for ten (10) days in regard to the domestic violence charge  proved 
here.    
Conclusion  
 For all of the above -stated reasons, Appellant’s appeal under Docket No. D1 -17-027 is 
allow ed in part  with regard to the explosives charges but denied in part  with regard to the 
domestic violence charge such that he shall be suspended for ten (10) days.  The Respondent 
shall return the Appellant to employment and compensate him for the time he was not paid after 
his termination of employment.    
/s/ Cynthia A. Ittleman  
Cynthia A. Ittleman   
Commissioner  
 
By vote of the Civil Service Commission (Bowman, Chairman; Camuso, Ittleman, Stein and 
Tivnan Commissioners) on May 10 , 2018.   
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration within ten days of the receipt of the Commission’s decision.  
Under the pertinent provisions of the Code of Mass. Regulations, 801 CMR 1.01(7)(l), the motion must identify a 
clerical or mechanical error in the de cision or a significant factor the Agency or the Presiding Officer may have 
overlooked in deciding the case .  A motion for reconsideration shall be deemed a motion for rehearing in accordance 
with G.L. c. 30A, § 14(1) for the purpose of tolling the time fo r appeal.  
Under the provisions of G.L c. 31, § 44, any party aggrieved by a final decision or order of the Commission may 
initiate proceedings for judicial review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior court within thirty (30) days after 
receipt of such order or decision.   Commencement of such proceeding shall not, unless specifically ordered by the 
court, operate as a stay of the Commission’s order or decision.  After initiating proceedings for judicial review in 
Superior Court, the plaintiff, or his / h er attorney, is required to serve a copy of the summons and complaint upon 
the Boston office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, with a copy to the Civil Service Commission, in 
the time and in the manner prescribed by Mass. R. Civ. P. 4(d).  
 
Notic e to: 
Bryan Decker,  Esq. (for Appellant)  
Katherine Hoffman , Esq. (for Respondent ) 
 
 