Notice sent
11/29/2017
J. A. P. RECEIVE:
L.,C.,C.  & P. DANIEL  OTERO,
N. A. M. Plaintiff, . nee 04 ne
R. M. B. i
- . Vs. MA OFF. of Attorney Genes
R. L. Q.,JR. . Adaunistrative  Law Ds ouTHE CITY OF LOWELL  and CIVIL  SERVICE  COMMISSION,
Defendants.
(sc) AMENDED!  MEMORANDUM  OF DECISION  AND ORDER  ON PLAINTIFF’SCOMMONWEALTH  OF MASSACHUSETTS
SUFFOLK,  ss. _ SUPERIOR  COURT
. CIVIL  ACTION
NO. SUCV  2016-3751-D
MOTION  FOR JUDGMENT  ON THE PLEADINGS
The City of Lowell (City) disciplined  plaintiff, Daniel Otero (“Mr. Otero”) by
suspending  him for five-days  for conduct  unbecoming  an officer. Otero has filed this
appeal under G. L. c. 30A, § 14 from  a final decision,  dated October  27, 2016
(“Decision”)  of the Civil Service  Commission  (“Commission”)  upholding  the City’s
decision  to impose  the five-day  suspension.  Pursuant  to Standing  Order 1-96, Mr. Otero
has filed a Motion  for Judgment  on the Pleadings  (“Motion”),  which  the Commission  has
opposed. After review  of the administrative  record,  motion  and memorandum  and upon
consideration  of oral arguments,  the Motion is DENIED.
BACKGROUND
Otero is employed  as a Lowell  Police Officer. He had a prior disciplinary  record.
On April 25, 2013, during  an investigation  of alleged  harassment  by a fellow  officer
against  his ex-wife,  “Ms. M” -- now Otero’s  wife — Otero told Lieutenant  Buckley  that
Officer  Golden  had sent a video of their child was holding  a laser pointer,  with the light
' The Court amends  its November  2, 2017 Memorandum  to address  the typographical
errors on page 1, identified  in the Attorney  General’s  letter to the Clerk, dated November
21, 2017.MEZe)
going on and off and that the child was penetrating  herself  in the vaginal  area with the
laser. Lt, Buckley  determined  that this description  departed  significantly  from a
description  of the video that Otero provided  at an earlier interview  on December  12,
2012. He filed a report of possible  child abuse against  Officer  Golden  pursuant  to G.L. c.
119, § 51A. Otero never filed such a report. During  the DCH investigation,  he gave a
different  account  of the video than he gave on April 25, 2013. DCF found no
substantiation  for the 51A report, and the Middlesex  District Attorney’s  Office closed its
investigation  into the matter. Otero and Ms. M. told investigators  that the video had been
lost.
Ms. M. then made a complaint  against  Officer  Golden  for domestic  violence. Lt.
Laferriere  of the Internal  Affairs  department  investigated  the complaint  and concluded
that Officer  Golden  had exercised  poor judgment  in taking and sending  the video, but did
not violate  police department  rules and regulations  in doing so. He concluded  that Otero
had provided  differing  reports  of the video, had made  a serious  allegation  against  another
officer which turned out to be unfounded. On February  12, 2014, Lt. Laferriere  found
that Officer  Otero had violated  rules and regulations  by engaging  in conduct  unbecoming
an officer, He delayed  disseminating  his report until August 12, 2014, because  the
District  Attorney’s  investigation  of Officer  Golden  was still pending.
Officer  Otero received  the findings  of the internal  affairs investigation,  dated
September  9, 2014, on September  11, 2014. Superintendent  Taylor testified  that, because
he desires  to protect  confidentiality  and privacy,  he does not release  the full findings  of
an Internal  Affairs  Investigation  to interested  parties  until a decision  has been finalized
about the action the Department  will take as a result of the investigation.  On November
13, 2014, the Superintendent  issued a Notice of Five Day Suspension  to Officer  Otero,
based upon Lt. Laferriere’s  finding  that Officer  Otero had engaged  in conduct
unbecoming  a police officer. Superintendent  Taylor  endorsed  Lt. Laferriere’s  finding
and increased  the discipline  because  of Otero’s  past infractions,  pursuant  to the
Department’s  policy of progressive  discipline. That prior disciplinary  history includes
two official reprimands  and one incident which result in counselling.  ,
The City manager  upheld  the discipline  based on a recommendation  of an
independent  hearing  officer  who presided  at Officer  Otero’s  Appointing  Authority
hearing.
Officer  Otero appealed  the City’s decision  to the Commission  on December  23,
2014. After an evidentiary  hearing,  the Hearing  Officer  issued the Decision,  upholding
the 5-day suspension.  Otero timely appealed  to this Court.
DISCUSSION
A. Standard  of Review
Under G. L. c. 30A, § 14(7), this Court has limited  power to set aside or modify
the Decision. It may do so if his substantial  rights may have been prejudiced  because  the
agency decision  is based on an error of law or on unlawful  procedure,  is arbitrary  and
capricious  or unwarranted  by facts found by the agency,  or is unsupported  by substantial
evidence.  G. L. c. 30A, § 14(7)(c)-(g).  Substantial  evidence  is “such evidence  as a
reasonable  mind might accept as adequate  to support  a conclusion.”  G. L. c. 30A, § 1(6).
The court must consider  the entire record, including  whatever  “fairly detracts”  from the
agency’s  finding,  but the Court has no power to substitute  its judgment  for that of the
agency if the record contains  substantial  evidence  to support  conflicting  propositions;  nor
may it second guess the agency’s  judgment  regarding  credibility  of witnesses  and the
weight  to be given to particular  evidence. See Doherty  v. Retirement  Commission  of
Medford,  425 Mass. 130, 135 (1997). When reviewing  an agency  decision,  the court is
required  to give “due weight  to the experience,  technical  competence,  and specialized
knowledge  of the agency,  as well as to the discretionary  authority  conferred  upon it.” G.
L. c. 30A, § 14(7).
The appealing  party bears the burden of demonstrating  the invalidity  of the
agency decision. See Bagley  v. Contributory  Ret. Appeal Bd,, 397 Mass. 255, 258
(1986). The Supreme  Judicial  Court has noted that the appellant’s  “‘burden  is heavy.”
Springfield  v. Dep’t of Telecomms.  & Cable, 457 Mass. 562, 568 (2010) (citation |
omitted),
B. Imposition  of Discipline
Officer  Otero’s  principal  argument  is that the Commission  lacked substantial
evidence  to accept Lt. Buckley’s  account  as true. He cites several  key aspects  of Lt.
Buckley’s  reporting,  First, Lt. Buckley’s  51 A report, made the same day as his police
- report, states that Ms, M. — not Officer  Otero -- made the penetration  allegations.
Second,  his December  12, 2012 police report did not mention  the video. Third, his April
25, 2012 police report does not mention  Ms. M putting  her head in her hands and
acquiescing  to Officer  Otero’s  statement. He also alleges that the Commission  failed to
make findings  on numerous  aspects of his favoritism/bias  argument.
Lt. Buckley  testified  from personal  knowledge  about the April 25, 2013 meeting.
The Commission  found his testimony  to be credible,  even though  there is little doubt that
his reporting  contained  inconsistencies.  Not only did the Hearing  Officer  have the
opportunity  to see Lt. Buckley’s  testimony,  but there were a number  of accrediting  facts.
The Hearing  Officer  could reasonably  view Lt. Buckley’s  contemporaneous  police report
of April 25, 2013 as the most persuasive  evidence  of the facts that Lt. Buckley  observed.
Moreover,  Officer  Otero knew that Lt. Buckley  intended  to file a 51A Report against
Officer  Golden  and had the chance  to set the record straight,  but did not. The
Commission  could view that fact as corroborating  Lt. Buckley’s  testimony  that he had
received  a report of child abuse, not just a vague  statement  about a small and unclear
video.
It was for the Commission  to assess the extent, if any, to which the
inconsistencies  in Lt. Buckley’s  various  accounts  caused  it to disbelieve  Lt. Buckley’s
testimony  at the hearing. The Decision  (at 18, A.R. 180) explicitly  resolved  that
question: “[a] Ithough  there were two discrepancies  involving  Lt. Buckley’s  reports and
the DCF report about the accusations,  Lt. Buckley  credibly  explained  each of them.” It is
for the fact-finder  to decide the significance,  if any, of inconsistencies  between  a
witness’s  testimony  and his prior inconsistent  statements.  See Doe No. 10800 v. Sex
Offender  Registry  Board, 459 Mass. 603, 639 (2011) (“To the extent that there were any
inconsistencies  among the statements  made by M.L., it was the province of the hearing
examiner  to evaluate  their reliability.”);  Massachusetts  Superior  Court Civil Practice  J ury
Instructions  (MCLE  3d ed. 2014), § 1.2(b) (“It is for you to say how significant  any
difference  is.”), The inconsistencies  in Lt. Buckley’s  accounts,  which he explained  at
least to a degree, do not preclude  a reasonable  person  from accepting  his testimony
regarding  Officer Otero’s misconduct.  That is particularly  true where there were reasons
(including  claimed  loss of memory,  destruction  of the video and animosity  between  Otero
and Golden  at the time) for the Hearing  Officer  to discredit  Otero’s  account.
There is also no question  that honesty  is crucial  to Otero’s  employment  because
“(plolice  work frequently  calls upon officers  to speak the truth when doing so might put
into question  a search or embarrass  a fellow  officer.” Falmouth  v. Civil Service
Comm’n,  447 Mass. at 801, citing Cambridge,  43 Mass. App. Ct. at 303. The
Commission  had sufficient  evidentiary  support  for upholding  the City’s decision  to
impose discipline  because  there was “reasonable  justification  for the action taken by the
appointing  authority  in the circumstances  found by the commission  to have existed  when
the appointing  authority  made its decision.””  Falmouth  v. Civil Service  Comm’n,  447
Mass. 814, 823 (2006),  quoting  Cambridge  v. Civil Service  Comm’n,  43 Mass. App. Ct.
300, 303 (1997).
C. Bias and Favoritism.
Officer  Otero also asserts that the Commission  failed to address  issues of bias and
favoritism.  This argument  relies upon the same type of deficiencies  in Lt. Buckley’s  .
account  discussed  above. The evidence  did not establish  any link those deficiencies  and
any favoritism. Indeed, it appears  that Lt. Buckley  and Lt. Laferriere  had very little prior
interaction  with Officer  Otero and therefore  little reason to be biased against  him,
Moreover,  Lt. Buckley  did file a § 51A report against  Officer  Golden.
The fact that Lt. Buckley  and Lt. Laferriere  did not conduct  the investigation  in
the manner  that Officer  Otero contends  was correct,  or that they did not credit his account
or interpretation  of the evidence,  does not show bias. Here, as in a large number  of
factually-contested  cases, unfavorable  action does not suffice  to warrant  an inference  of
Notice sent
11/29/2017
bias. There is no evidence  suggesting  that any of the police witnesses  against Officer
Otero had any personal  animosity  or ulterior  motive.  The fact that the imposition  of
discipline  occurred  when Officer  Otero was first in line for promotion  to Sergeant  is not
strong evidence,  if any, for an inference  of favoritism  — any conscientious  appointing
authority  would want to know the resolution  of pending disciplinary  charges before
making  a decision  about promotion.
The Hearing  Officer  stated: “. . . I sensed no bias or other inappropriate  motive
against  the Appellant  on the part of Lt. Buckley,  Lt. Laferriere  or Supt. Taylor.” While
the use of the word “sensed”  may be unfortunate  in an agency’s  findings  of fact, there is
no ambiguity  about the Hearing  Officer’s  conclusion  that she found no bias or favoritism
on the part of the two lieutenants  or the superintendent.  Indeed,  the Decision  states (at
12, A.R. 174), among  other things: “[p]rior  to the child abuse allegations  asserted  by the
Appellant,  Lt. Laferriere  had no particular  view of the Appellant’s  professionalism  and he
had no problems  with the Appellant.”  The Commission’s  findings  on favoritism,  and the
evidentiary  support  for them, are rational  and supported  by the evidence.
CONCLUSION
For the above  reasons:
1. The plaintiffs  Motion  for Judgment  on the Pleadings  is DENIED.
2. The defendants’  Cross-Motion  for Judgment  on the Pleadings  is GRANTED.
3. FINAL JUDGMENT  SHALL ENTER  Aegan  the Final Decision  of the
Civil Service Commission,  dated nf lo 6,
Douglas  H. Wilkins
Justice  of the Superior  Court
Dated: November  28, 2017(sc)
