1      COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
 
SUFFOLK, SS.               CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
 
              One Ashburton Place:  Room 503  
              Boston, MA 02108  
              (617) 727 -2293  
 
VICENTE TORRES ,  
  Appellant s 
   v. 
                                                                 D1-16-181 
                                                                                                         
CITY OF CHICOPEE,   
  Respondent                                                                               
      
 
 
Appearance for Appellant :                               Douglas A. Hall  
     NAGE / IBPO  
     346 Main Street  
     Cromwell, CT 06416  
                         
Appearance for Respondent:         Thomas J. Rooke, Esq.  
     Associate City S olicitor  
     City of Chicopee  
     73 Chestnut Street  
     Springfield, MA 01103     
               
Commissioner:           Christopher C. Bowman  
 
SUMMARY OF DECISION  
 
     Shortly after being criminally charged with domestic assault and battery regarding a  
female companion and being placed on a sixty (60) -day suspension, Mr. Torres visited 
the home of this female over her objection, resulting in a 911 call, the dispatch of 
multiple police officers and the issuance of a no trespass order against him.  The 
seriousness of these offenses, which occurred within three (3) years of his appointment, 
provided the City of Chicopee with just cause to terminate him as a police officer.  
 2 DECISION  
On October 31, 2016, the Appellant, Vicente Torres (Mr. Torres) , pursuant to the 
provisions of G.L. c. 31, § 43, filed an appeal with the Civil Service Commission 
(Commission), contesting the decision of the Respondent, the City of Chicopee (City)  to 
terminate his employment as a police officer from the City’s Police Department.  On 
December 14, 2016, I held a pre -hearing at the Springfield State Building in Springfield, 
MA.  I held a full hearing at the same location over a period of two (2) days on April 12, 
2017 and May 10, 2017 .1  As no written notice was received from either  party, the 
hearing was declared private.  All witnesses , with the exception of the Appellant  and the 
Police Chief , were sequestered.  Two (2) CDs were made of the hearin g.2  The Appellant 
submitted a post -hearing brief on July 14, 2017.  The City opted not  to submit a post -
hearing brief.  
FINDINGS OF FACT :  
Based upon the documents entered into evidence ( Respondent Exhibits R1 -R20 and 
Appellant Exhibits A1 -A9), stipulated facts,  the testimony of : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1 The Standard Adjudicatory rules of Practice and Procedures, 810 CMR §§ 1.00, et seq ., apply to 
adjudications before the Commission, with G.L. Chapter 31, or any Commission rules, taking precedence.  
2 If there is a judicial appeal of this decision, the plaintiff in the judicial appeal would be obligated to 
supply the court with a transcript of this hearing to the extent that he/she wishes to challenge the decision as 
unsupported by the substantial evidence, arbitrary and capricious, or an abuse of discretion.  If such an 
appeal is filed, th ese CDs should be used to transcrib e the hearing.  3 Called by the City3: 
 
 Captain Daniel Sullivan, Chico pee Police Department;  
 A.W., L icensed Clinical Social Worker [at a counseling center in Springfield; 
hereafter “Springfield Center”]   
 Chief William Jebb, Chicopee Police Department;  
 
Called by the Appellant:  
 
 Vicente Torres, Appellant ;  
 
and taking admin istrative notice of all matters filed in the case, pertinent statutes, 
regulations, policies, stipulations and reasonable inferences from the credible evidence, a 
preponderance of the evidence establishes the following:  
1. Mr. Torres is a resident of Chicopee , MA.  He graduated from high school and has 
completed some college courses.  He served in the United States Marine Corps for 
eight (8) years and was deployed on four (4) combat missions. He is fluent in English 
and Spanish and can read and write Italian. (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
2. On February 2, 2013, Mr. Torres was appointed as a police officer with the City’s 
Police Department. (Stipulated Fact)  
Facts Related to Prior Suspension  
3. On the night of July 17, 2015, Mr. Torres was a patron at a local restaurant that offers 
entertainment and dancing.  He acknowledges that he was drinking heavily. 
(Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
                                                 
3 The City was also authorized by the Commission to subpoena the following other witnesses  who did not 
appear :  1) Jane Doe,  a female party who filed a complaint with the Chicopee Police Department against 
Mr. Torres.  Ms. Doe failed to app ear and I gave the City the opportunity to enforce the subpoena and 
compel her appearance.  Since Ms. Doe is a resident of Connecticut, and given the challenges associated 
with enforcing a subpoena in another state, the City opted not to file an action in Superior Court to enforce 
the subpoena. 2)  M.W., a social worker at the Springfield  Center .  He was no longer employed at the 
Springfield  Center  at the time the Springfield  Center received the subpoena .  The Director of the 
Springfield  Center reported  to counsel for the City that no current contact information was available for 
him; 3) S.T., a counselor  at the Greenfield Program .  He failed to attend the first day of hearing and the 
City did not attempt to have him appear for the second day of hearing befo re the Commission.  4 4. While at the local restaurant, a physical altercation occurred between Mr. Torres and 
“Jane Doe ”, a female acquaintance who Mr. Torres ha s known  for some time. 
(Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
5. As part of the altercation with Ms. Doe, Mr. Torres acknowledges that he “shoved her 
or pushed her in the head.” (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
6. On July 18, 2015, Mr. Torres and Ms. Doe exchanged a series of text message s that 
Ms. Doe would later provide to the City’s Police Department over one (1) month 
later.4 
7. As part of the text messages between Ms. Doe and Mr. Torres, they trade d 
accusations about who initiated physical contact, but Mr. Torres acknowledges hitting 
Ms. Doe. (Exhibit R8)  
8. Among the text message exchanges on July 18, 2015 is the following:  
“Ms. Doe:    I don’t hit you in the face?  u hit me and pushed my head in the wall.  
Mr. Torres:   You slap me in the face [Ms. Doe].  
Mr. Torres:   N now I might lose my j ob for this shit.  
Ms. Doe:   I walked away from u and U pushed open the bathroom door yelling 
crazy shit at me calling me names and lost ur shit.  
 
Mr. Torres:  You slap me that’s y.  
 
Mr. Torres:  I was so mad cuz you slap me but I shouldn’t hit you n I’m sor ry  
    for that cuz I love you.” (Exhibit R8)  
 
                                                 
4 The Commission was not provided with copies of the actual text messages.  Rather, the text messages are 
referenced in an “Investigative Report” initiated by Captain Daniel Sullivan of the City’s Police 
Department in August 2015 .  The Investigative Report references a text message from Ms. Doe th at 
contains an image “showing injury to [Ms. Doe]’s right forehead.”  The actual text messages, including this 
image, were not provided to the Commission..  5 9. Ms. Doe did not immediately file a complaint with the City’s Police Department 
regarding the altercation at the local restaurant on July 17, 2015. (Testimony of 
Captain Sullivan and Exhibit R8)  
10. Approximately one (1) week after July 17th, Mr. Torres and Ms. Doe began dating 
again. (Exhibit R8)  
11. On August 22, 2015, Ms. Doe slept over at Mr. Torres’s house in Chicopee. (Exhibit 
R8) 
12. While at Mr. Torres’s house on the night of August 22nd and the early morning hours  
of August 23rd, Ms. Doe noticed a text message from another female on Mr. Torres’s 
cell phone.  Unbeknownst to Mr. Torres, Ms. Doe used Mr. Torres’s phone to send 
several text messages to the other female, including a photograph of Mr. Torres 
partially un dressed. (Exhibit R8)  
13. Ms. Doe and the other female subsequently contacted each other and concluded that 
they were both dating Mr. Torres at the same time. (Exhibit R8)  
14. On August 27, 2015, Ms. Doe came to the City’s Police Department to file a 
complaint aga inst Mr. Torres regarding the incident at the local restaurant that 
occurred on the night of July 17th.  Captain Daniel Sullivan, the Captain in charge of 
Internal Affairs, conducted a recorded interview with Ms. Doe. (Testimony of 
Captain Sullivan and Exh ibit R8).5    
15. During the August 27th interview, Ms. Doe did not disclose  to Captain Sullivan  that 
she had resumed  dating Mr. Torres after July 17th or that she had used Mr. Torres’s 
phone on August 23rd to communicate with another female that Mr. Torres wa s 
dating. (Testimony of Captain Sullivan and Exhibit R8)  6 16. In regard to what occurred at the local restaurant on the night of July 17th, Ms. Doe 
reported to Captain Sullivan that she and Mr. Torres had a verbal argument which 
escalated to a point where Ms. D oe grabbed a drink from Mr. Torres’s hand, crushed 
the cup and proceeded to leave the restaurant. (Exhibit R8)  
17. Captain Sullivan’s summary of his interview with Ms. Doe then states in part that Ms. 
Doe reported the following to him:  
“[Ms. Doe] proceeded to leave the bar.  As she was walking down the stairs, Vinny 
was following her and yelling at her.  She went into the Ladies bathroom to get 
away from Vinny.  Vinny tried to follow her into the Ladies bathroom.  [Ms. Doe] 
tried to prevent Vinny from getting i nto the bathroom by pushing against the door  
but Vinny forced the door open and went into the bathroom.  
 
Once he was in the bathroom, Vinny slapped [Ms. Doe] in the face.  [Ms. Doe] said  
she slapped Vinny in the face.  [Ms. Doe] said that Vinny then became  enraged – 
she described it like he turned into a different person.  Vinny slapped [Ms. Doe] two 
more times in the face.  [Ms. Doe] described the final blow from Vinny  as a 
slap/push which forced her head against the bathroom wall.  [Ms. Doe] slumped to 
the bathroom floor.  A bouncer from the [local restaurant] had to pull Vinny off of 
[Ms. Doe].  
 
Vinny ran out of the [local restaurant] and drove off in his car.”  
(Exhibit R8 and Testimony of Captain Sullivan)  
 
18. During the August 27th interview, Ms. Doe prov ided the name (T.W.) of a female 
witness that was in the restaurant bathroom on July 17th. (Testimony of Captain 
Sullivan & Exhibit R8)  
19. At the conclusion of the August 27th interview, Captain Sullivan advised Ms. Doe of 
her right to file for a restraining order and told he r that she should seek such an order 
in the district court in Connecticut where she resides. (Testimony of Captain Sullivan 
and Exhibit R8)  
                                                                                                                                                 
5 The CD of the recorded interview was  not introduced as an exhibit.  7 20. One (1) day later, on August 28, 2015  at 7:45 A.M.,  the mother of the other female 
that Mr. Torres  was dating came to the Chicopee Police Department to file a 
complaint against Mr. Torres.  According to Captain Sullivan’s report, the mother 
reported to a sergeant that Mr. Torres was dating her daughter; that she discovered 
that Mr. Torres was dating another wom an at the same time; and that her daughter 
wanted Mr. Torres to return a glass figurine that she had given him as a gift. (Exhibit 
R8) 
21. That same day (August 28th) at 3:00 P.M., Captain Sullivan contacted Ms. Doe to 
inquire  about whether she had ob tained a restraining order in the district court in the 
town in CT where she resides.  Ms. Doe told Captain Sullivan that she was advised to 
go to Chicopee District Court or a court house in Hartford, CT.  Captain Sullivan 
advised Ms. Doe to contact the Ch icopee District Court which, to Captain Sullivan’s 
knowledge, referred her back to CT. (Testimony of Captain Sullivan and Exhibit R8)  
22. While the exact date and time is not clear, either from Captain Sullivan’s testimony or 
his investigative report (Exhibit R8), it appears that, also on August 28th, Captain 
Sullivan spoke to Ms. Doe about the new information the Department had received 
from the mother of the other female that had been dating Mr. Torres. (Exhibit R8)  
23. During this conversation, Ms. Doe acknowled ged to Captain Sullivan that she had 
resumed dating Mr. Torres after July 17th; that she was at his house on the night of 
August 22nd; and that she had viewed text messages on his phone and sent text 
messages from his phone to the female who she believed t hat Mr. Torres was dating.  
Captain Sullivan asked Ms. Doe if she had ever sent text messages using Mr. Torres’s 
cell phone before and she said she had not. (Exhibit R8)  8 24. Captain Sullivan, concerned that Ms. Doe was being treated like a “ping -pong ball” 
regarding how to initiate a restraining order, decided to issue his own internal order to 
Mr. Torres ordering him to stay away from Ms. Doe. (Testimony of Captain Sullivan)  
25. On August 28, 2015 at 3:40 P.M., Captain Sullivan handed Mr. Torres an email 
which sta ted: 
“To:  Officer Torres  
  From:   Captain Sullivan  
  CC:  Chief Jebb  
As you know, you are the subject of an investigation.  The victim in this investigation 
is [Jane Doe].  Until this matter is resolved, I am ordering you not to contact [Jane 
Doe] either  directly or through a third party and I am also ordering you to stay away 
from [Jane Doe].  
 
Furthermore, I am suspending  your licensing to carry a firearm.  
 
Captain Daniel P. Sullivan … ” (Exhibit R11)  
 
26. That same day, on August 28th, Captain Sullivan plac ed Mr. Torres on paid 
administrative leave. (Exhibit R8)  
27. On August 31, 2015, Captain Sullivan interviewed T.W., the other female that Ms. 
Doe reported was in the bathroom that night.  T.W. identified Mr. Torres from an 
array of photographs.  Captain Sulliv an’s summary of his interview with T.W. states 
in part:  
“In o ur interview [T.W.] said that in late July 2015, she went to the [local restaurant] 
with her friend [name redacted].  They got to the [local restaurant] about 11:30 P.M.  
T.W. said that she only had a couple of beers that night and by the time the incident 
happened, he head was clear.  At around 1:00 A.M., [T.W.] was in the Woman’s 
Bathroom on the first floor.  She just finished going to the bathroom and she was 
washing her hands when she heard ye lling.  The girl came in the bathroom first.  She 
was yelling something like s tay away from me and trying to push against the door to 
keep the man out.  The man eventually got in the bathroom.  Once he stepped foot in 
the bathroom he slapped the girl in th e face.  The girl immediately slapped him back.  9 He then slapped her again.  When he slapped her the second time, her head hit a piece 
of maroon colored molding that was eye level on the bathroom wall.  [T.W.] doesn’t 
believe the man hit the girl hard enou gh to knock her to the ground but the girl ending 
up sitting on the ground.  [T.W.] also doesn’t believe the man was going to hit the girl 
again.  
 
[T.W.] said she made eye contact with her and immediately turned and left the 
bathroom.  A bouncer came into the bathroom about a minute after the incident. ” 
(Exhibit R8)  
28. On September 3, 2015, Captain Sullivan interviewed B.O., the bouncer on duty at the 
local restaurant on July 17th.   B.O. and Mr. Torres are both on the loc al restaurant’s 
softball team. (Testim ony of Captain Sullivan)  
29. Captain Sullivan’s report states the following regarding his interview with B.O.:  
“[B.O.] was standing in the … bar .. area, behind a glass door, when he heard them 
yelling at each other.  They both looked upset.  Vinny was red in  the face.  [B.O.] 
wasn’t sure what was going on between them.  He sees Vinny with different girls all 
the time and he sees her with different guys all the time.  [B.O.] thought she’s one of 
the girls Vinny hooks up with.  
 
[B.O.] said the girl that Vinny w as yelling at went into the Girl’s bathroom.  Vinny 
tried opening the door of the bathroom but she held the door closed.  Vinny pushed 
the door open and she appeared to fall into the corner behind the door into the 
makeup station.  
 
[B.O.] said that once he  saw the girl fall he rushed towards the girls bathroom.  He 
had to push five people out of the way to get to the bathroom.  He saw her feet on the 
floor and Vinny was yelling over her.  He grabbed Vinny by the back of his shirt and 
pulled him out of the b athroom.  [B.O.] said he never stepped foot in the bathroom; it 
was just a matter of grabbing Vinny by the back of his shirt and pulling him out of the 
bathroom.  
 
[B.O.] yelled at Vinny ‘What are you doing.’ ‘Think before you do anything stupid’ 
and ‘Get t he fuck outta here.’  Vinny th en ran from the restaurant and toward the 
parking area.  
 
[B.O] said that there is no way that Vinny and the girl could have hit each other in the 
short period of time that it took him to get from the glass door to the girl’s b athroom.  
[B.O.] said the bathroom door was pushed pretty hard by Vinny.  He believes the way 
Vinny opened the door, Probably caused her to fall pretty hard.  
 10 After he saw Vinny leave the restaurant, [B.O.] went into the girl’s bathroom.  The 
girl was stil l sitting on the floor.  He asked her if she was okay and she shook her 
head yes.  [B.O.] said there were two or three other girls in the bathroom with her.”  
 
(Exhibit R8)  
 
30. Captain Sullivan discounted B.O.’s statements in part because he (Captain Sullivan)  
didn’t believe that B.O., based on his location at the time, could have known one way 
or another whether Mr. Torres struck Ms. Doe. (Testimony of Captain Sullivan)  
31. Captain Sullivan never visited the restaurant but viewed photographs taken of the 
area.  No  video of the relevant areas of the restaurant were available. (Testimony of 
Captain Sullivan)  
32. Captain Sullivan requested a criminal complaint in Chicopee District Court against 
Mr. Torres for Domestic Assault and Battery. (Exhibit R8 and testimony of Capt ain 
Sullivan)  
33. On November  9, 2015, Chicopee District Court Clerk Clark Kozikowski held a show 
cause hearing and found probable cause for char ging Mr. Torres with Domestic 
Assault and Battery.  He continued the case for one year to be dismissed pending no 
further charges.  Ms. Doe was present and indicated that she did not want to pursue 
the matter. (Exhibit R8)  
34. On or about November 12, 20156, as part of his internal investigation, Captain 
Sullivan conclud ed that  Mr. Torres violated Department Rules relating  to Internal 
Affairs, General Considerations and Guidelines by “damag[ing] his reputation, the 
reputation of the Chicopee Police Department” and “violated this Policy and 
Procedure by assaulting and battering [Jane Doe], in front of witnesses, in the 11 women ’s bathroom of a crowded nightclub.”  Captain Sullivan also concluded that 
these actions were a violation of the Department’s Rules prohibiting criminal 
conduct. (Exhibit R8)  
35. In his “Recommendation for Disposition”, Captain Sullivan stated in part:  
“The wi sh of the victim in this case that she does not want to pursue charges in court  
  does not mitigate the fact that Officer Torres committed an assault and battery  
  against her.  Officer Torres acted in an absolute reckless manner in this incident and  
  the victim is fortunate that her injuries weren’t more severe.  
 
  …. 
 
Officer Torres’s outrageous and inexcusable conduct in this incident leads me to the 
conclusion that he does not have the fitness or suitability to be a Chicopee Police 
Officer.  My reco mmendation is that Officer Vicente ‘Vinny’ Torres be terminated 
from employment with the Chicopee Police Department.”  
(Exhibit R8)  
 
36. On November 23, 2015, Chief Jebb, Captain Sullivan and Captain Lonny Dakin met 
with counsel for the City to discuss internal  investigations. (Exhibit R20)  
37. According to a written timeline prepared by Captain Dakin:  “Captain Sullivan had 
completed his investigation with recommendation to the Chief.”  Yet, he goes on to 
state:   
“It was decided that Officer Torres would be requir ed to write a ‘to from’ explaining 
the incident prior to closing this internal investigation.  Since Captain Sullivan was 
going on vacation, I was assigned to complete this aspect of the investigation.”  
(Exhibit R20)  
 
38. On November 25, 2015, Captain Dakin or dered Mr. Torres to respond to a series of 
questions regarding  the altercation with Ms. Doe at the local restaurant including:  “If 
there was a physical altercation did you strike [Ms. Doe] – if so, how and how many 
times.” (Exhibit R20)  
                                                                                                                                                 
6 I have inferred that Captain Sullivan wrote this on November 12, 2015 based on a review of his report and 
his testimony.  While it is possible that he wrote this sometime before November 12th, it could not have 12 39. On December 4, 201 5, Mr. Torres submitted an email response which did not 
specifically respond to the above -referenced question by Captain Dakin.  Rather, Mr. 
Torres stated in his response:  “ … An apology was given to [Ms. Doe] for my 
behavior that night and we continue to  be friends after that night …”. (Exhibit R12 & 
R20)  
40. Upon receiving the email response from Mr. Torres, Captain Dakin informed Chief 
Jebb that Mr. Torres had violated his direct order by refusing to answer all the 
questions posed to him. (Exhibit R20)  
41. On D ecember 4, 2015, Chief Jebb and Captain Dakin met with Mr. Torres and the 
local union president at which time Chief Jebb informed Mr. Torres that he had failed 
to follow Captain Dakin’s order to provide answers to each of the questions posed to 
him. (Testi mony of Chief Jebb)  
42. At the December 4th meeting, Mr. Torres cited his Fifth Amendment right against 
self-incrimination and the fact that the criminal charges  in court  had been continued 
for a year. (Testimony of Chief Jebb)  
43. According to the written timelin e provided by Captain Dakin, Chief Jebb then:  
 “ … explained to Torres that the ‘to from’ was not for criminal purposes but for the 
administrative investigation.  Chief Jebb explained to Officer Torres that he is 
required to answer the questions fully and truthfully.  Officer Torres stated that he 
wasn’t going to answer the questions.  Chief Jebb paused and told Officer Torres 
that’s fine.” (Exhibit R20)  
 
44. On December 17, 2015 , Chief Jebb hand -delivered a letter to Mr. Torres notifying 
him that he was be ing suspended for five (5) days .  The letter stated in part:  
                                                                                                                                                 
been writte n after November 12th.  13 “The specific reason for this suspension is as follows:  On Thursday, August 27, 2015 
[incorrect date]7 you were involved in an incident (15 -3563 -OF), which resulted in 
the issuance of a criminal com plaint (15 -687-AR) for Domestic A&B.  Your conduct 
on this day in question is a result of poor judgment, which demonstrates your lack of 
suitability for the position of police officer for the City of Chicopee.”  
(Exhibit R1)  
 
45. On February 10, 2016, the part ies reached a se ttlement agreement in which Mr. 
Torres agreed to accept the already -imposed 5 -day suspension in addition to an 
additional fifty-five (55) -day suspension, plus an additional thirty (30) days which 
would be held in abeyance for two (2) years and, “if no further disciplinary issues 
arise in those two years, those thirty days would be vacated.”  (Exhibit R2)  
46. The remainder of the City’s February 10, 2016 letter to Mr. Torres states the 
following:  
“You further agreed to be evaluated by a professio nal / therapist to determine if you 
would benefit from alcohol counseling and/or anger management.  If said 
professional/therapist determines that you are not in need of any counseling for these 
issues, then you do not need to participate in any counseling .  However, if the 
professional/therapist determines that you would benefit from either alcohol 
counseling and/or anger management, you shall participate in said treatment program 
as recommended by the professional / therapist until such time as you are su ccessfully 
discharged from the treatment program(s).  
 
Your attorney, Michael Clancy, and the city attorney, Thomas John Rooke, will work 
with you to determine the appropriate designated medical/counseling facility to 
undergo said evaluations, with your inp ut, in an attempt to identify a facility that 
either accepts your health insurance coverage or Veterans Administration benefits.  
 
In consideration of the above discipline, Police Chief Jebb had agreed to release you 
from ‘administrative duties’ upon your s uccessful completion of the fifty -five (55) 
working -day suspension.  Furthermore, he has agreed to return your license to carry 
(LTC) at the same time and restore you to your normal working duties, as Police 
Chief Jebb deems most appropriate for the needs of the Chicopee Police Department.  
 
Your additional fifty -five days of suspension will commence on February 14, 2016 
and end on May 6, 2016, when you should return/report for duty on that date.” 
(Exhibit R2)  
                                                 
7 It is undisputed that the alleged misconduct took place on July 17 and 18th, 2015, not August 27th. I infer 
this was a scrivener’s error.  14  
47. Mr. Torres, his counsel at the time and counsel  for the City all signed the February 
10, 2016 letter with Officer Torres acknowledging that he agreed to meet the terms 
and conditions stated in the letter. (Exhibit R2)  
48. There is no reference in the February 10, 2016 letter regarding Captain Sullivan’s 
August 28, 2015 order to Mr. Torres to have no contact with Ms. Doe “until this 
matter is resolved.” (Exhibits R2 & R11)  
49. On Monday, February 15, 2016, Mr. Torres contacted the VA to inquire about 
alcohol counseling and anger management counseling. (Testimony  of Mr. Torres)  
50. Mr. Torres subsequently learned that there  was a “big waiting line” at the VA and 
notified his then -counsel of this.  It is Mr. Torres’s understanding that his counsel at 
the time conveyed this information to counsel for the City. (Testimon y of Mr. Torres)  
51. Sometime near the end of February 2016, Ms. Doe visited the home of Mr. Torres for 
a social visit. (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
52.  On March 6, 2016, at approximately 1:30 A.M., while on suspension, Mr. Torres was 
leaving the Foxwoods Resort Cas ino in Mashantucket, CT. (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
53. Upon leaving Foxwoods, Mr. Torres sent a text message to Ms. Doe and asked if he 
could stop by her home in Enfield, CT on his way home.  She told him he could.  
Enfield, CT is an approximately 1 ½ hour dri ve from Foxwoods. (Testimony of Mr. 
Torres)8 
54. Just before 3:00 A.M., Ms. Doe sent Mr. Torres a text message telling him not to 
come to her home because her roommates were now home.  At the time Mr. Torres 
                                                 
8 I asked Mr. Torres if he preserved these text messages and he said he had not.   15 received t his text message, he was approximately “tw o minutes” away from Ms. 
Doe’s home. (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
55. Despite receiving this text message, Mr. Torres went on to Ms. Doe’s property  in 
Enfield, CT  at approximately 3:00 A.M. and began knocking on her bedroom 
window , asking her to let him in the ho use. (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
56. Ms. Doe called 911 and the Enfield, CT police responded to the property. By the time 
police arrived, Mr. Torres had left the property and driven away. (Exhibit R15)  
57. One of the responding Enfield, CT police officers completed an incident report 
stating the following:  
“On 03/06/16 at about 0300, I responded to [address redacted] on a 911 complaint 
from [Ms. Doe]  reporting that her ex boyfriend Vincent (sic) was trying to get into the 
house.  Upon our arrival, [Ms. Doe] told us t hat Vicente had already left in his silver 
Honda.  The area was checked with negative results.  
 
[Ms. Doe] said she had dated Vicente f or about 11 months but broke up with him 
after he assaulted her in Massachusetts in November 2015.  Chicopee police were 
notified of that incident and investigated the complaint.  Vicente is a Chicopee police 
officer.  [Ms. Doe] said she went to a court hearing and spoke with Chicopee Police 
but no orders were issued by the court.  She did not seek a restraining order in 
Mass achusetts or Connecticut. She had not spoken with him since.  Vicente has come 
over to her house around 8am a few times during the last couple of weeks, knocking 
at her door.  She did not answer the door and he left each time.  This morning around 
3am he t exted her9, knocked at both her door and her bedroom window.  That is when 
she called the police.  He did not try to force his way into her house.  [Ms. Doe] did 
not want to have to go to any courts but agreed to fill out a Trespass Warning 
Statement and a  written statement about not wanting any contact including by phone 
with Vincent (sic).  Vincent (sic) was contacted using her phone and given both 
warnings.  A victims card was given to [Ms. Doe].  
 
                                                 
9 I am a ware that there is a conflict between Mr. Torres’s live testimony before the Commission that he 
texted Ms. Doe at 1:30 A.M. and initially received her consent to come visit her when compared to the 
statement, as reported by the Enfield, CT police, by Ms. D oe.  I did not have the benefit of Ms. Doe’s live 
testimony.  While I have credited Mr. Torres’s testimony regarding the 1:30 A.M. text, I have also credited 
his testimony that, shortly prior to arriving at Ms. Doe’s house, he received a text message from her telling 
him not to visit her.  16 A MDT message was sent requesting extra patrol.  I notifi ed Headquarter 
Commander Lt. S. … I called and spoke with Chicopee Police Sgt. Godere about the 
incident.  
 
No RO’s, PO’s or wants (sic) for [Ms. Doe] or Vicente were found.  
 
Vicente called the Enfield Police later in the morning saying he wanted to file a 
harrassment (sic) complaint against [Ms. Doe] for continuing to call and text him and 
make false complaints against him.  I told him to come to the police department but 
as of this report he has not shown up.   
  
(Exhibit R15)  
58. On March 7, 2016, Captain Sul livan sent an email to the Enfield, CT Police 
Department asking them to forward to him any information regarding the above -
referenced incident. (Exhibit R13)  
59. Also on March 7, 2016, Captain Sullivan sent an email to Sgt. Godere asking him 
(Godere) to submit  a detailed report regarding his communication with the Enfield, 
CT Police Department, which he did. (Exhibit R14)  
60. On April 5, 2016, Ms. Doe rescinded the no trespass order. (Exhibit R15)  
61. On April 13, 2016, Mr. Torres attended a substance abuse evaluation at the 
Springfield  Center in Springfield, MA. (Exhibit R17)   
62. Prior to meeting with A.W., a Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW) at the 
Springfield  Center, Mr. Torres was required by the Springfield  Center to fill out an 
“Audit C” form and a “Patient Hea lth Questionnaire.”  According to A.W., the 
Springfield  Center does not release the actual forms, but, rather, references them in a 
“summary” prepared by the counselor. (Testimony of A.W.)  
63. On May 3, 2016, Mr. Torres attended a “domestic violence evaluation ” at the 
Springfield  Center. (Exhibit R17)  17 64. Prior to meeting with M.G., a counselor at the Springfield  Center, Mr. Torres 
completed a release of information form on May 3rd authorizing the Springfield  
Center to receive and release various information, inclu ding the receipt of police 
reports, CORI, etc.  The contact person on that authorization form was counsel for the 
City. (Exhibit R17)  
65. Also, prior to meeting with M.G., Mr. Torres completed a nine (9) -page “Domestic 
Violence Program Intake and Evaluation Fo rm” (Intake Form) which includes 
seventy -eight (78) questions and a “Violent and Controlling Behavior Checklist” 
(Checklist) which includes twenty -one (21) entries with instructions to: “Check off 
each type of abuse (circle and specific behavior) that you have done.” (Exhibit R17)  
66. The City entered the intake form as Exhi bit R17, with seven questions highlighted in 
yellow. Those questions are as follows, with the answers provided by Mr. Torres in 
bold italics : 
Question 20 : 
Describe the violent incident that led to your referral to this program.  Do not detail 
the other person’s actions.  Date Occurred:  July 2015 .  Charges_______________  
___________________________________________________________________  
Question 21 : 
To who (sic) was your behavior directed.  No one .  
Question 22 : 
Did you hit your partner, grab, threatened (sic), or restrain her in some way.  Were 
there any weapons used.  DESCRIBE YOUR ACTIONS:  
I push (sic) her away. __________________________________________________  18 ____________________________ ________________________________________  
____________________________________________________________________  
____________________________________________________________________  
Question 23 :   
 
What were your reasons for choosing those actions?  What did you want to happen?  
 
Get her away from me.  No I didn’t want it to happen.  
 
Question 25 : 
 
Describe your actions, reasons and why you chose those actions? (sic)  
 
I couldn’t tell you I don’t know.  I’m not a violent person.  
 
Question 57 : 
 
Do you currently dr ink?  Yes  ___ X___     No ______ If yes, how much per week?  
 
Glass of wine once or twice a week.  
 
Question 74 : 
 
Do have any weapons?  Yes ____  No:  ___ X___ 
 
67. The Checklist completed by Mr. Torres is also part of Exhibit R17.  Similar to the 
Intake Form, th e City submitted this Checklis t with four entries highlighted.   As 
referenced above, the Checklist Instructions state:  “Check off each type of abuse 
(circle each specific behavior) that you have done.”  (Exhibit R17)  
68. Mr. Torres did not check the following  entries on the Checklist, highlighted by the 
City:  
___ Slap, punch, grab, kick, push, finger poking, pull hair, pinch, bite, twist arm.  
 ___  Intimidation (blocking her10 exit, threatening or scary gestures, use of size to  
    intimate, standing over her,  driving recklessly, outshouting, punching walls,  
                                                 
10 The use of the pronoun “her” in all of the Springfield  Center forms when referring  to a domestic violence 
victim would appear to be an administrative oversight.  19     banking (sic) the table, knocking things around).  
 
(Exhibit R17  
69. Mr. Torres did check the following entries on the Checklist, highlighted by the City:  
__X__  Yelling, swearing, being lewd, using angry e xpressions or gestures,  
       outshouting.  
 
__X__  Lying, withholding information, being untruthful.  
 
(Exhibit R17)  
 
70. After completing the above -referenced forms, Mr. Torres met with M.G., the 
Certified Batterer ’s Counselor at the Springfield  Center. (Testi mony of Mr. Torres  
and Exhibit R17)11 
71. On May 4, 2016, shortly before his scheduled return to work (post -suspension), Mr. 
Torres called and left a message for Captain Sullivan to inquire about picking up his 
gear.  Mr. Torres received a reply message from Ca ptain Sullivan stating that his gear 
was ready for pick -up. (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
72. Also on May 4, 2016, Mr. Torres completed an “Authorization to Obtain / Release 
Medical Record Information” at the Springfield  Center at the request of A.W., the 
counselo r who had completed the substance abuse evaluation approximately three (3) 
weeks prior.  That form lists Captain Sullivan as the contact person for the Chicopee 
Police Department. (Exhibit R17)  
73. On what I infer (from the documents and testimony) was May 4th, A.W. received 
“collateral information” from the “criminal justice” division at the Springfield  Center, 
which had been provided by the Chicopee Police Department. (Testimony of A.W.)   
                                                 
11 As previously referenced, M.G. did not testify before t he Commission.  20 74. On May 5, 2016, Sgt. Godere sent an email to Captain Sullivan, stating :  “Here you 
go sir, still working on the 911 tapes.”  Attached is an internal email from an 
employee of the Records Division of the Enfield, CT Police Department stating:   
“I did not find any contacts, since March 6, 2016, regarding [Ms. Doe] and Vicente  
Torres.  I checked both CT Chief and [illegible] using their names and her last know 
address of [redacted].  I did, however, find that [Ms. Doe] cam e to the PD on April 5, 
2016 at approximately 452 hours and gave a written statement to [police officer] 
rescinding the trespass order against Torres … “ (Exhibit A4)  
 
75. Sometime in May 2016, which I infer was shortly after receiving the above -
referenced report from the Enfield, CT Police Department, Captain Sullivan had a 
phone conversation with Ms. Doe at which  time she confirmed that she had dropped 
the no trespass order against Mr. Torres. (Testimony of Captain Sullivan)  
76. On May 6, 2016, when Mr. Torres reported for work at the Chicopee Police Station, 
he was told by the Captain on duty that he was still on “de sk duty”. (Testimony of 
Mr. Torres)  
77. In documents dated May 12, 2016, both A.W. (the substance abuse counselor at 
Springfield ) and M.G. (the domestic violence counselor) completed an evaluation 
summary regarding Mr. Torres. (Exhibit R17)  
78. A.W.’s substance ab use summary evaluation  is in memorandum format addressed 
“TO:  Captain Daniel Sullivan, Chicopee Police Department.”  The summary 
evaluation  references the “Audit -C” and “PHQ -9” evaluations completed by Mr. 
Torres which A.W. indicated cannot be released by  Springfield  because of privacy 21 issues.12  I give no weight to any reference to these two (2) evaluations as I have no 
information upon which to assess their validity. (Exhibit R17)  
79. The majority of A.W’s substance abuse summary relates to an interview that A.W. 
had with Mr. Torres three weeks’ prior  to writing the summary .  A.W. could not 
provide a list of the exact questions that she asked of Mr. Torres during the interview.  
Further, although A.W. took notes regarding Mr. Torres’s responses, she did not 
retain them. (Testimony of A.W.)  
80. The primary purpose of A.W.’s evaluation was to assess Mr. Torres for substance 
abuse and mental health issues, not issues related to domestic violence. (Testimony of 
A.W.)  
81. Prior to completing her substance abuse evaluation s ummary, A.W. spoke to M.G.’s 
supervisor regarding the interview that took place later between Mr. Torres and M.G. 
regarding domestic violence -related issues. (Testimony of A.W.)  
82. During A.W.’s interview with Mr. Torres, Mr. Torres acknowledged that he was 
“more drunk than usual” at the local restaurant on July 17, 2015 and that he made 
mistakes. (Testimony of A.W.)  
83. A.W. stated in her evaluation summary that:  “[Mr. Torres] omitted all accounts  that 
were reported in police records regarding any violent allega tions and impulsive angry 
behavior that are being investigated at this time .” (emphasis  added ) (Exhibit R17)  
84. As part of her testimony before the Commission, A.W. stated that Mr. Torres didn’t 
provide enough “details” about such things as the content of tex t messages that she 
later reviewed as part of the police investigation records.  When asked if she asked 
                                                 
12 The release signed by Mr. Torres explicitly allows for the Springfield  Center to release “psychological 
testing and results.”  22 Mr. Torres for such details, she stated:  “I always do” and then stated that “the client 
can say whatever he wants.” (Testimony of A.W.)  
85. In regard to w hether Mr. Torres was in need of substance abuse counseling, A.W. 
wrote:   
“  … client does not meet criteria for a substance abuse disorder presently, however 
he does have an alcohol use disorder.  It is recommended that he continue monitoring 
his intake of alcohol and seek help for clinical intervention  should his use of alcohol 
increase …” (Exhibit R17)  
 
86. The evaluation summary prepared by M.G. (the domestic violence counselor at 
Springfield ) and also dated May 12, 2016 was also  in memorandum format.  It was 
addressed “TO:  Asst. City Solicitor – Atty. Thomas Rooke.” (Exhibit R17)  
87. In a section titled “Findings and Recommendations”, M.G. wrote:  
“Vicente Torres presented the facts included in this evaluation.  He was cooperative 
and engaged during the evalua tion.  He appeared sincere in his presentation of the 
facts.  A partner contact was conducted  and police reports were obtained.  After 
reviewing victim statements, copies of text messages, witness statements and police 
reports, it clear that the facts were  withheld as reported by Vicente Torres and he had 
minimized his physically (sic) abuse.  The witness statements place the assault in the 
women’s bathroom and not at an  exit as he reported.  His contact with the victim after 
the alleged and continued conta ct put him at risk of continued progressive violence.  
Based on the information provided, Vicente Torres is a candidate for certified 
batterer’s intervention services and is recommended to attend 40 weeks of group 
sessions.”  (emphasis  added ) 
 
(Exhibit R17)  
88. Neither Captain Sullivan or Chief Jebb ever spoke with A.W. or M.G. before 
reaching their subsequent conclusions that Mr. Torres had been untruthful as part of 
the evaluation process at the Springfield  Center.  Rather, Chief Jebb relied on the 
credibility  “of the institution” (the Springfield  Center). (Testimony of Chief Jebb and 
Captain Sullivan)  23 89. On Tuesday, May 17, 2016, counsel for the City wrote an email to Chief Jebb, 
Captain Sullivan and then -counsel for Mr. Torres stating:  “Attached please find a 
domestic violence summary evaluation concerning Officer Vi ncent (sic) Torres that I 
just opened from an email that came into my office Friday afternoon … Please review 
and call me to discuss.” (Exhibit A5)  
90. On May 19, 2016, Chief Jebb sent a “reply to all” e mail stating: “After reviewing this 
document, I have decided to keep Officer Torres on administrative duties until he 
successfully completes this 40 week program.” (Exhibit A5)  
91. Mr. Torres subsequently spoke to the director at the Springfield  Center and the y 
discussed his concerns about attending group sessions in Springfield, which is in 
close proximity to Chicopee, where he serves as a police officer. (Testimony of Mr. 
Torres)  
92. Mr. Torres was informed by the Director that a counseling program in Greenfield  
(hereafter “Greenfield Program”) , offered the same services, including the group 
sessions. (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
93. Chief Jebb was aware that Mr. Torres would be attending the Greenfield Program  and 
had no objection to this. (Testimony of Chief Jebb)  
94. On July 19, 2016, Mr. Torres met with S.T., a counselor at the Greenfield Program , to 
go through an intake  process, similar to the intake process he had already completed 
at the Springfield  Center. (Testimony of Mr. Torres and Exhibit R18)  
95.  As part of the inta ke process  on July 19th, Mr. Torres was asked to complete another 
checklist, placing a number from 1 to 4 next to each question, with 1 equal to “never; 24 2 equal to “once or twice”; 3 equal to “sometimes”; and 4 equal to “frequently.” 
(Exhibit R18)  
96. The City  submitted this checklist as part of Exhibit R18 and highlighted four (4) of 
Mr. Torres’s response s.  These questions and Mr. Torres’s response regarding these 
questions is as follows:  
A. Have you ever pushed, restrained, grabbed and/or wrestled your partner ?  2 
B. Have you ever slapped, punched or kicked your partner? 1 
C. Have you ever called / texted / messaged your partner repeatedly at 
inappropriate times when she did not want you to? 2 
D. Have you ever said the abuse didn’t happen when it did or denied using 
abusive or controlling behaviors when you really do?  1 
(Exhibit R18)  
97. Also on July 19, 2016, Mr. Torres and an “intake clinician” at the Greenfield Program  
signed a “Program Agreement” agreeing to make a 40 week commitment “to the 
group”.  The Program Agreeme nt states in part:  “I understand that if I miss any 
session, I will have to make them up an pay for both the missed and make -up sessions 
to hold my space in the group …  I understand that I am expected to attend every 
meeting and that if I miss more than 3 meetings in a 20 week period, I be at risk for 
termination from the group.  The maximum number of absences allowed for the 40 
week program is 6 …  If I am unable to attend group, I will leave a message before 
the group starts with my assigned group leade r.” (Exhibit A7)  25 98. On July 22, 2016, counsel for the City sent an email to the Program Coordinator at 
the Springfield  Center asking for a detailed timeline regarding Mr. Torres’s contact 
with the Springfield  Center to enroll in the batterers’ program. (Exhib it R10)  
99. Sometime between July 22nd and August 5th, 2016, counsel for the City sent the 
Springfield  Center Program Coordinator a follow -up email seeking a response to the 
July 22nd email. (Exhibit R10)  
100. On or around August 5, 2016, the Program Coordinator at  the Springfield  Center 
forwarded an email to counsel for the City stating:  
“Good Morning, Mr. Rooke:  The evaluation was completed, faxed to your officer 
around 4/16/16, days later Mr. Torres came in person to start the intake process to 
enroll in the pro gram, paperwork was handed and minutes later he returns papers 
without completing it as he stated per his attorney not to complete the intake yet.  
That was the last time Mr. Torres was at the Springfield  Center no contact after that.”  
(Exhibit R10)  
 
101. On August 11,  2016, Captain Sullivan completed an “investigative report ” 
regarding Mr. Torres visiting the home of Ms. Doe in Enfield, CT on March 6, 2016 
as well as Mr. Torres’s intake evaluation at the Springfield  Center. (Exhibit R10)  
102. Captain Sullivan’s Augu st 11, 2016 investigative report summarizes the Enfield, 
CT Police Department reports regarding what occurred on March 6th, including that 
Ms. Doe obtained a trespass order and then rescinded it. (Exhibit R10)  
103.   Captain Sullivan’s August 11, 2016 Investigative Report  cites Chicopee Police 
Department Policy and Proc edure 4.01. I.  INTERNAL AFFAIRS, GENERAL 
CONSIDERATIONS AND GUIDELINES which states in part:  “All police 
employees are expected to conduct themselves, whether on or off duty, in such a 
manner as t o reflect favorably upon themselves and the department.”  Immediately 26 after citing this Department Policy and Procedure, Captain Sullivan states in his 
August 11th report:  
“On March 6, 2016 , Officer Torres damaged his reputation, the reputation of the 
Chic opee Police Department and violated this Policy and Procedure by going, 
unwanted and uninvited, to the home of [Ms. Doe] in Enfield, CT at around 3 o’clock 
in the morning on March 6, 2016 …” (Exhibit R10)  
 
104. Captain Sullivan’s August 11, 2016 Investigative R eport also cites Rule and 
Regulation 300:23 INSUBORDINATION and states the following regarding t he 
Enfield, CT incident :   
“Officer Torres violated my direct order by going, unwanted and uninvited, to the 
home of [Ms. Doe] … at around 3 o’clock in the morn ing on March 6, 2016.  The 
unwanted arrival of Officer Torres at [Ms. Doe]’s home necessitated a 9 -1-1 call, the 
subsequent response of several Enfield Police Officers to the scene and a trespass 
order being taken out against Officer Torres.  
 
On March 6, 2 016 Officer Torres certainly should have known that the ‘matter’ with 
[Ms. Doe] was not ‘resolved’ because on November 9, 2015 the Clerk Magistrate 
stated that the case was continued for one year.  Also, Officer Torres had just started 
his 55 work -day susp ension on February 16, 2016.  Further, Officer Torres wasn’t 
even evaluated by a Certified Batterer’s Counselor until two months later on May 3, 
2016.  
 
… 
 
[Ms. Doe] eventually rescinded the trespass order that she took out against Officer 
Torres.  Officer Torres clearly has influence over [Ms. Doe].  Unfortunately, she is 
influenced by a liar, a batterer and someone that does not take responsibility for his 
conduct.”  (Exhibit R10)  
 
105. In regard to Mr. Torres’s evaluation at the Springfield  Center, Captain Sul livan’s 
August 11, 2016 report , after citing Rules and Regulations regarding truthfulness,  
states in part:  
“As of August 5, 2016, Officer Torres has refused to enroll in 40 weeks of mandated 
counseling for Domestic Batterer’s.  
 
… 27  
Officer Torres was sent t o Domestic Violence Evaluation as part of an Agreement for 
Suspension.  Officer Torres certainly did not cooperate in the evaluation.  Officer 
Torres willfully lied to the counselor about the details of the incident that I 
investigated.” (Exhibit R10)  
 
106. As previously referenced, C aptain Sullivan never spoke with A.W. or M.G., the 
counselors who conducted the intake sessions at the Springfield  Center. (Testimony 
of Captain Sullivan)  
107. Captain Sullivan concluded his August 11th investigative report by writing:   
“Officer Torres’s shameless and repeated violations of the Rules and Regulations of 
the Chicopee Police Department lead me to the conclusion that he does not have the 
fitness or suitability to be  Chicopee Police Officer.  My recommendation is that 
Office r Vicente ‘Vinny’ Torres be terminated from employment with the Chicopee 
Police Department.” (Exhibit R10)  
 
108. By letter dated August 16, 2016, Chief Jebb notified Mr. Torres that he was 
suspended for five (5) days effective August 19th – August 25th, 2016.  The 
suspension letter stated that the suspension was for:   1) violating a direct order by 
visiting the home of Ms. Doe on March 6, 2016; and 2) willfully lying to the domestic 
violence counselor at the Springfield  Center “about the details of the domestic 
incident.” Chief Jebb’s letter specifically references Captain Sullivan’s report, which 
was attached.  (Exhibit R3)13  As referenced above, Captain Sullivan’s investigative 
report stated that Mr. Torres, by visiting the home of Ms. Doe on March 6th, had als o 
                                                 
13 The August 16, 2016  suspension letter informs Mr. Torres that he can request a hearing to contest the 5 -
day su spension  and that, at the hearing, the Mayor, who is the appointing authority, can increase the 
discipline up to and including termination.  Thus, according to the plain language of the letter, there would 
be no hearing, a prerequisite under G.L. c. 31, s.  41 for issuing discipline more than five days, unless Mr. 
Torres contested the 5 -day suspension . The City was required to notify Mr. Torres, independent of the five -
day suspension, that the Mayor intended on holding a hearing to consider a greater penalty , independent of 
any appeal of the 5 -day suspension by Mr. Torres.  Since Mr. Torres never contested this procedural error 
(i.e. – did not indicate on his appeal form to the Commission that he wanted to file a procedural error claim 
under Section 42), this  issue is moot .    
 28 violated Department Policy and Procedure 4.01. I.  INTERNAL AFFAIRS, 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS AND GUIDELINES.  (Exhibit R10)  
109. On August 18, 2016, the City’s Mayor, serving as the Appointing Authority, sent 
a letter to Mr. Torres acknowledging receipt of Mr. Torres’s appeal of the 5 -day 
suspension and notifying him of a hearing to be held on August 25, 2016 at which 
time he could “sustain, overrule or impart a more severe form of discipline up to and 
including termination.”  The Mayor’s August 18th letter re -stated the reasons for 
discipline as:  1) violating a direct order by visiting the home of Ms. Doe on March 6, 
2016; and 2) willfully lying to the domestic violence counselor at the Springfield  
Center “about the details of the domestic incident.”  (Exhibit R 4) 
110. By letter dated August 22, 2016, Mr. Torres was provided with a start date of 
August 30, 2016 to attend his first group counseling session. (Testimony of Mr. 
Torres and Exhibit R9)  
111. On August 24, 2016, counsel for the City forwarded an email to Captain S ullivan 
with an attached confirmation form from the Greenfield Program  indicating that Mr. 
Torres had enrolled in and was scheduled to begin group counseling sessions on 
August 30th. (Exhibit R9)  
112. The local hearing scheduled to occur before the Mayor on Aug ust 25, 2016 was 
postponed by agreement of the parties. (Exhibit R6)  
113. On August 30, 2016, Mr. Torres failed to attend his first counseling session at the 
Greenfield Program . (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
114. Asked during his testimony before the Commission whether he attended the first 
group session on August 30 , 2016, Mr. Torres stated:  29 “I didn’t but if you’re aware, if you look at the date, the first date of the group  
meeting, it’s, uh, I was meeting with the Mayor or I had been suspended the day 
before or the day after, so I was distraught, but according [to] the program, I [can] 
miss six times.  It’s the only one I’ve missed.  I’ve been thirty -three (33) times.  
I’m almost done with the program.” (Testimony of Mr. Torres)  
 
115. Mr. Torres did not meet with the City ’s Mayor on August 30, 2016.  
116. On September 1, 2016, counsel for the City forwarded “collateral documentation” 
to the Greenfield Program  including the recent notice of suspension dated August 16, 
2016 and Captain Sullivan’s investigative report dated August  11, 2016, in which 
Captain Sullivan had concluded that Mr. Torres was:  “ a liar, a batterer and someone 
that does not take responsibility for his conduct .” (Exhibits R9 & R10)  
117. Beginning September 6, 2016, Mr. Torres began attending the weekly group 
sessio ns at the Greenfield Program .  At the beginning of each month thereafter, 
beginning on October 4, 2016, the Program Director at the Greenfield Program  
completed “Monthly Status Reports” confirming that Mr. Torres was attending the 
weekly sessions.  As of O ctober 4, 2016, they reported that Mr. Torres had attended 
four (4) sessions and been absent for one (on August 30th).   (Exhibit A9)  Exhibit A9 
also contains status reports completed during the first week of November & 
December 2016 and January, February  and March 2017 confirming that Mr. Torres 
had attended all weekly sessions with no absences. As of March 2017, he had 
attended 27 weekly sessions. (Exhibit A9)  
118. On September 6, 2016, A.M., the Program Director at the Greenfield Program , 
forwarded an eleven  (11)-page fax to counsel for the City including an un-signed 
“intake summary”. (Exhibit R18)  30 119. The intake summary states, in part, that there are “inconsistencies” between the 
narrative reported at intake and the collateral documents provided.  Specifically , one 
portion of the unsigned intake summary , which appears to be written by the Program 
Director,  states in part:  
“These [collateral] documents were reviewed by the Program Director.  There are 
inconsistencies between the narrative reported at intake and the collateral documents 
provided.  There was no mention during Vicente’s intake of a second incident with 
[Ms. Doe] which occurred on March 6, 2016 in Enfield, CT .  Neither did Vicente 
state that his altercation with [Ms. Doe] occurred in the women’s rest room at the 
[local restaurant].  Vicente indicated that the incident occurred as he was attempting 
to exit the building.  The victims who gave statements per the collateral information 
were not discussed at intake.  The level of violence reported in collat eral information 
is also inconsistent with the narrative given at intake.  The intake narrative did not 
include any mention of injury to [Ms. Doe], nor did Vicente report slapping her.”  
… 
 
Vicente was given a group start date of August 30, 2016.  A notific ation of group start 
was mailed to him, and he was verbally notified.  The facilitators of the group 
indicated that Vicente did not attend on August 30, 2016.” (Exhibit R18)  
 
120. There is no evidence that the Program Director at the Greenfield Program  
attended  the Intake Session.  I infer that she did not.  
121. Captain Sullivan never spoke with the intake worker who met with Mr. Torres at 
the Greenfield Program .  (Testimony of Captain Sullivan)  
122. Captain Sullivan is not certain who wrote the un -signed Intake Summary from the 
Greenfield Program  but he speculates that portions of it were written by the intake 
worker and portions of it, including the above, were  written by the Program Director, 
writing  in the third person. (Testimony of Captain Sullivan)  
123. On September 14,  2016, Captain Sullivan completed another investigative report 
in which he concluded that Mr. Vicente engaged in insubordination by failing to 
attend the group therapy session at the Greenfield Program  on August 30th and that 31 Mr. Torres was untruthful duri ng the intake process because of inconsistencies 
between the “collateral” documents and what Mr. Torres reported to the intake 
counselor.   Captain Sullivan concluded in this report that his most recent findings 
only confirm his prior recommendation that M r. Torres be terminated. (Exhibit R9)  
124. In regard to both the August 11, 2016 and September 14, 2016, investigative 
reports, Mr. Torres was never asked to participate in an interview or answer questions 
about the allegations.  Asked why Mr. Torres was not gi ven an opportunity to respond 
to the allegations during the investigation, Chief Jebb indicated that:  a) If you need 
your suspect to testify, your case is weak; b) Mr. Torres had already admitted to 
engaging in domestic abuse via his text messages to Ms. Doe and to the Court as 
evidenced by the Court’s decision to find probable cause; and c) his answers would 
likely be “much of the same” and “deceptive”. (Testimony of Chief Jebb)  
125. By letter dated October 6, 2016, Chief Jebb notified Mr. Torres that he was b eing 
suspended for an addition al five (5) days for “willfully lying” during his intake 
process at the Greenfield Program  and for failing to attend the first session of the 
group counseling sessions on August 30, 2016. (Exhibit R5)  
126. By letter dated, October 11, 2016, the City’s Mayor notified Mr. Torres that the 
Mayor had received Mr. Torres’s appeal of the five -day suspension and that a hearing 
would be held the next day, October 12, 2016.  The Mayor’s letter cited the same 
reasons as contained in Chief Jebb ’s October 6th letter and contained the same 
language as the prior letter from the Mayor regarding his authority to increase the 
penalty. (Exhibit R6)  32 127. On October 12, 2016, the Mayor conducted a local appointing authority hearing 
pursuant to G.L. c. 31, s. 41 regarding the charges associated with both of the 5 -day 
suspensions that had been imposed by Chief Jebb. (Exhibit R7)  
128. At the October 12, 2016 hearing, the City’s witnesses were limited to Chief Jebb 
and Captain Sullivan.  The Mayor, serving as the heari ng officer, did not hear from 
any percipient witnesses from the Springfield  Center or the Greenfield Program .  
(Exhibit R7)  
