1      COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS  
 
SUFFOLK, SS.               CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION  
 
              One Ashburton Place:  Room 503  
              Boston, MA 02108  
              (617) 727 -2293  
 
JOSEPH WOLSKI ,  
  Appellant  
   v. 
                                                                 D1-17-033 
                                                                                                         
CITY OF GARDNER ,  
  Respondent                                                                               
      
 
 
Appearance for Appellant :                               Kenneth H. Anderson, Esq.  
     Anderson, Goldman, Tobin &  
       Pasciucco  
     50 Redfield Street:  Suite 201  
     Dorchester, MA 02122  
                         
Appearance for Responde nt:         Jill A. Romer, Esq.1  
     City of Gardner  
     Law Department  
     Gardner, MA 01440  
               
    
Commissioner:           Christopher C. Bowman  
 
SUMMARY OF DECISION  
 
     There was just cause for the City of Gardner to terminate Mr. Wols ki from his 
position as a police officer based on his violation of various rules and regulations, 
including those related to truthfulness.  Mr. Wolski, without justification, pulled and 
aimed his Department -issued Taser at a patient at a local hospital and  then slapped the 
patient in the face.  He failed to report the incident and then, as part of an internal 
investigation, falsely stated that he did not pull his Taser.  Termination was appropriate 
given the need for police officers to be truthful in additi on to Mr. Wolski’s prior 
disciplinary history.  
                                                 
1 Subsequent to the full hearing and subsequent to submitting a proposed decision, Attorney Romer retired 
from the City and submitted a notice of wit hdrawal of appearance as counsel.  A notice of appearance as 
counsel was simultaneously submitted by Attorney John M. Flick, to whom this decision is being sent.  2 DECISION  
On February 16, 2017 , Mr. Wolski , Joseph Wolski (Mr. Wolski) , pursuant to the 
provisions of G.L. c. 31, § 43, filed an appeal with the Civil Service Commission 
(Commission), contesting the decision o f the Respondent, the City of Gardner  (City)  to 
terminate his employment as a police officer from the City’s Police Department. On 
March 13, 2017, I held a pre -hearing at the Armand P. Mercier Community Center in 
Lowell, MA .  I held a full hearing at the s ame location on April 24, 2017 .2  As no written 
notice was received from either  party, the hearing was declared private.  All witnesses , 
with the exception of Mr. Wolski , were sequestered.  A CD was made of the hearing.3    
Both parties submitted proposed decisions to the Commission on June 23, 2017.   
FINDINGS OF FACT :  
Based upon the documents entered into evidence ( Respondent Exhibits 1 -194 and 
Appellant Exhibits A -C5, stipulated facts,  the testimony6 of: 
Called by the City: 
 
 Derek Ferreira, Police Office r, City of Gardner (Officer Ferreira) ; 
 A.R., Security Supervisor, local hospital (A.R.);  
 Neil Erickson, Police Chief, City of Gardner (Chief Erickson);  
 
                                                 
2 The Standard Adjudicatory rules of Practice and Procedures, 810 CMR §§ 1.00, et seq ., apply to 
adjudications before the Commission, with G.L. Chapter 31, or any Commission rules, taking precedence.  
3Subsequent  to the hearing, the City had the recording transcribed and a copy of the transcript was 
provided to counsel for Mr. Wolski and the Commis sion.  That transcript is deemed to be the official record 
of the proceedings.   
4 Exhibits 16 and 17 are the video recorded interviews of Mr. Wolski and Officer Ferreira.  They cannot be 
viewed without downloading a reader.  Should this case be subject to  judicial review, the City is 
responsible for ensuring that the DVDs can be viewed by the Court as part of its review.  
5 At the hearing, counsel for the Appellant stated that he would submit, via email, the entire internal affairs 
investigation, which wou ld be marked as Exhibit D.  I inquired with counsel twice but did not receive the 
Exhibit.  Various Exhibits, however, including Respondent Exhibit 18, appear to include the bulk of the 
internal affairs investigation, including summaries of interviews with  hospital employees, including those 
who testified before the Commission.  I have reviewed all of these documents, and, where appropriate, 
compared them to the live testimony that these witnesses offered before the Commission.  
6 Employees from a local hos pital w ho testified before the Commission are referred to by their initials.  3 Called by Mr. Wolski : 
 
 M.G., Patient  Safety Specialist, local hospital (M.G.);  
 P.L., Emergency Room N urse, local hospital (P.L.);  
 Joseph Wolski, Appellant (Mr. Wolski);   
 
and taking administrative notice of all matters filed in the case, pertinent statutes, 
regulations, policies, stipulations and reasonable inferences from the credible evidence, a 
prepo nderance of the evidence establishes the following:  
1. Mr. Wolski began his employment as a police officer with the City on December 17, 
2007. (Stipulated Fact)  
2. Prior to his employment with the City, Mr. Wolski served as: a military police officer 
in the Unit ed States Air Force for five (5) years; a Winchendon police officer for 
approximately  two (2) to three (3) years; and a police officer for the Massachusetts 
Environmental Police (MEP)  for approximately one (1) year . (Testimony of Mr. 
Wolski)  
3. On December 28 , 2016 at approximately 1:00 P.M., Mr. Wolski, Officer Ferreira and 
a police sergeant were dispatched to Connors Street in Gardner as a result of a call 
regarding a male party ( the subject) under the influence of drugs and alcohol who was 
suicidal. (Exhibi ts 1, 2 and Testimony of Officer Ferreira and Mr. Wolski)  
4. The subject became combative causing Officer Ferreira to draw his department Taser  
as a warning technique while giving verbal commands to the subject. (Exhibit 2 and 
Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
5. The sergeant at the scene told Officer Ferreira not to engage the Taser .  The sergeant 
and Mr. Wolski grabbed onto the subject and Officer Ferreira re -holstered his Taser . 
(Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  4 6. The sergeant, Officer Ferreira and Mr. Wolski then st ruggled to bring the subject to 
the ground.  During this struggle, Officer Ferreira scraped his hand on a nearby stone 
wall. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
7. Pursuant to “Section 12” (of  G.L. 123 as amended by Chapter 410 of the Acts and 
Resolves of 2004 ), the subject was then involuntarily transported and admitted to a 
local hospital (the hospital). (Exhibit 2 and Testimony of Officer Ferreira and Mr. 
Wolski)  
8. At approximately 1:20 P.M., the subject, accompanied by Mr. Wolski, along with 
Officer Ferreira an d the sergeant  (who drove their own cruisers ), arrived at the 
hospital. (Exhibit 1 and Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
9. The subject from the Connors Street incident was admitted to “Room 5” of the 
emergency room at the hospital.  (Testimony of Officer Ferreir a and Mr. Wolski)  
10. In Room 5 , the subject  was loud, belligerent and threatening.  Mr. Wolski, along with 
Officer Ferreira and the sergeant, were eventually able to calm the subject in Room 5 
down. (Testimony of Mr. Wolski and Officer Ferreira)  
11. Earlier that day (December 28th), another individual (the patient ), had been 
involuntarily transported and admitted to “Room 7” of the hospital by the State Police 
and the Barre Police Department. (Exhibit C)  
12. According to the police report, the patient , prior to being involuntarily transported 
and admitted to Room 7 of the emergency room : 
 was “on a roller coaster of emotions”;  
 had threatened to kill himself ; 5  had threatened to take the gun from one of the police officers and break his 
wrist;  
 had threatened to “kick the  shit out of” all the police officers present at the 
scene. (Exhibit C)  
13. Also according to the police report, the patient , before being transported, “became 
irate again and lunged forward in a ‘head but t’ type maneuver, striking [his brother] 
in the right c heek” (Exhibit C)  
14. Eventually the subject was administered three (3) separate injections of sedation 
medication that calmed him enough to go the hospital, although he still “attempted to 
break free of [the police] grasp and fight against us” with each injec tion continuing to 
threaten the police with physical violence. He was then transported to the hospital and 
admitted to Room 7 of emergency room. (Exhibit C)  
15. Room 7 of the emergency room is in close proximity (two “doors” down) to Room 5. 
(Chalk A)  
16. While th e sergeant, Officer Ferreira and Mr. Wolksi were in Room 5 trying to calm 
the subject down, Officer Ferreira could hear the patient  in Room 7 “talking loud 
enough to hear” but did not know exactly what the patient  in Room 7 was saying. 
(Testimony of Office r Ferreira)  
17. On multiple occasions, Officer Ferreira left Room 5 and walked down to the nurses ’ 
station of the hospital to wash his scraped hand.  On one of these occasions, a male 
security guard at the hospital told Officer Ferreira  that the patient  in Roo m 7 wanted 
to fight them; that he did not like police officers; and that the police officers should 
stay away from the patient  in Room 7. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  6 18. Once the subject in Room 5 was restrained, the sergeant and Mr. Wolski left the 
hospit al at approximately 2:25 P.M. while Officer Ferreira remained at the hospital to 
receive treatment for the hand injury sustained at Connors Street. (Testimony of 
Officer Ferreira)  
19. Mr. Wolski had left the hospital to obtain departmental forms that Officer F erreira 
needed to complete due to the injury to his hand. (Testimony of Mr. Wolski and 
Officer Ferreira)  
20. After Mr. Wolski and the sergeant left the hospital, Officer Ferreira was standing near 
the sink of the nurses’ station. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira  and Chalk A)  
21. Officer Ferreira proceeded to “throw in a chew [chewing tobacco]” at which point the 
patient  in Room 7 engaged him in conversation, mentioning  that both men use the 
same brand of chewing tobacco. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
22. The conversati on between Officer Ferreira and the patient  in Room 7 lasted 
approximately ten (10) to fifteen (15) minutes.  Officer Ferreira was standing at the 
nurses’ station and the patient  was sitting on a rolling chair in the doorway of Room 
7.  The two (2) men wer e speaking across a hallway, approximately three (3) to four 
(4) feet away from each other. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
23. There was no actual door where the patient  was sitting due to a recent incident 
involving vandalism. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
24. Officer Ferreira described his conversation with the patient  in Room 7 as a 
“rollercoaster” in which the patient  was calm at times but would then “ramp himself 
back up” talking about his confrontation with police earlier that day, at one point 7 telling Off icer Ferreira that he is immune to sedatives and Taser s.  (Testimony of 
Officer Ferreira)  
25. While the patient  in Room 7 was talking to Officer Ferreira, the chair that the patient  
was sitting on was halfway over the doorway threshold and his legs were just o utside 
the doorway, on the hallway floor. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
26. The conversation between Officer Ferreira and the patient  in Room 7 ended when a 
hospital employee walked by and told the patient  to get back in his room.  At that 
point, the patient  “went irate … began screaming … threatening staff.  Just yelling at 
people.  He w ent from a  zero to a hundred.” (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
27. Believing at this point that the patient  should be handled by hospital staff (as opposed 
to police), Officer Fe rreira walked away from the patient , down the hallway, near the 
corner of the nurses’ station. From this position, Officer Ferreira  still had the patient  
in his si ght and he  observed hospital staff trying to calm the patient  down, but the 
patient  continued  to scream at and threaten hospital staff.  (Testimony of Officer 
Ferreira)  
28. At approximately 2:50 P.M., Officer Ferreira saw Mr. Wolski (who had just returned 
and re -entered the hospital) walking down the hallway toward the nurses’ station.  
Officer Ferreir a walked a few steps toward Mr. Wolski (and away from Room 7) to 
greet him at which point Mr. Wolski said words to the effect “what’s this asshole’s 
problem?”.  Officer Ferreira replied by saying words to the effect “leave it alone; it’s 
the ER’s problem; not ours.” (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
29.  After this brief verbal exchange between the officers, Officer Ferreira walked back to 
where he was previously standing (in the hallway at the corner of the nurses’ station) 8 and Mr. Wolski walked toward the patie nt in Room 7. (Testimony of Officer 
Ferreira)7 
30. Officer Ferreira then made the following observations:  
 “He [Wolski] was trying to have a conversation with the patient  in Room 7 
and de -escalate the situation … for a couple seconds.”  
 
 “He [Wolski] came around  and came towards me where I was still stationed at 
the corner.”  
 
 “He [Wolski] was facing me, so away from the patient  in Room 7.”  
 
 “At that point, I observed Officer Wolski take his department -issued Taser  out 
of his holster and turned and faced the patie nt in Room 7.”  
 
 Mr. Wolski was “seven or eight feet” from the patient . 
 
 “He [Wolski] brought it up to the patient  in Room 7.  Like brought it to 
[inaudible], bring it in front of you.  So he brought it up in front o f him instead 
of like down by his side.  It wasn’t down, it was in front of him.”  
 
 “He pointed it at the patient  in Room 7.”  
 
 “He began to – he took a couple steps forward and then began to do almost 
like a swaying, taunting motion with the Taser , he was ducking left and right 
pointing the Taser  at the patient  in Room 7.”  
 
 “Officer Wolski re -holstered his Taser  and patted the patient  on his shoulder.”  
 
(Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
 
31. A.R., a security supervisor at the hospital, also saw Mr. Wolski remove his Taser  
from his holster and point it at  the patient  in Room 7. (Testimony of A.R.)  
                                                 
7 This testimony differs from the statement that Officer Ferreira previously gave to the Police Chief and 
Deputy Police Chief.  In his statement to the Police Chief and Deputy Po lice Chief, Officer Ferreira stated 
that both he and Mr. Wolski walked toward the patient.  Which version is correct does not change my 
findings regarding what happened next, including whether Mr. Wolski pulled his Taser and when he 
slapped the patient.  9 32. The patient , who remained sitting on the rolling stool in the doorway when Mr. 
Wolski  drew his Taser , began to roll the stool back into Room 7 and Mr. Wolski  
followed him into the room. (Testimony of Ferreira 49: 22; 100:22)  
33.  The patient  and Mr. Wolski  began yelling at each other inside the room and the 
patient , who stands about six -foot-six, stood upright using the edge of the hospital 
bed to prop himself up, and positioned himself face to face with Mr. Wolski  while the 
verbal altercation with Mr. Wolski  continued. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira )  
34. During this verbal argument, the patient  raise d his hands up to his chest area and then 
Mr. Wolski , who was standing with his hands by his side, “open -hand smacked the 
patient … in the left side of … [his] … face.” Officer Ferreira described this smack as 
an “open hand, full arm extension across the face, full on” slap which was “extremely 
loud”. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
35. Mr. Wolski and Officer  Ferrerira  then pushed the patient  onto to the bed to restrain 
him.  Once he was on the bed , the patient  yelled that he had been assaulted, saying  
“You punched me in the face, you punched me in the face” to which Mr. Wolski  
replied :  “I didn’t punch you, I open -hand smacked you ”. (Testimony of Officer 
Ferreira)  
36. After the patient  in Room 7 had been restrained and sedated by hospital staff, Officer 
Ferreira was medically cleared to leave the hospital.  While Mr. Wolski  and Officer 
Ferreira walked out of the ER together, Officer Ferreira asked Mr. Wolski  if he was 
going to “pull a number on the incident” meaning complete a Police Incident Report 
about what just took place.  Mr. Wolski responded : “No, I’m not going to do that – 10 you know, we came up here, this guy was acting like an a sshole and we helped them 
out.”  (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
37.  After Officer Ferreira and Mr. Wolski completed their shift and while off duty later 
that same evening, Officer Ferreira began a text messaging conversation with Mr. 
Wolski about this hospit al incident and the patient  in Room 7.  The conversation 
began at 5:22 PM on December 28, 2016 by Officer Ferreira texting Mr. Wolski  a 
picture of an alcoholic beverage Ferreira was drinking  and Mr. Wolski  responding as 
follows:  
Ferreira:  Almost there Ima o 
Wolski:  Nice! I gonna tell [redacted]  when she comes home.  How      
   would you describe the slap heard around the world!  
Ferreira:  Fax machines stopped at the sound that was a grown ass      
   man being smacked by another grown ass man.  
Wolski:  Haha he asked for it!  
Ferreira:  Dude fuck yeah he did.  He was being a complete [expletive]  the    
   whole time.  I just love when you were fucking with him      
   with the Taser  before all that shit happened haha.  He       
   needed to know he wasn’t as big  as he was pretending        
Wolski:  That’s rite he wasn’t running the show, the doctor runs the      
   show and if people don’t understand that we explain that to      
   them in the simplest of ways!  
   (Exhibit 18; Testimony of Officer Ferreira)  
38. A.R., t he security supervisor at the hospital, completed a Hospital Security Unit 
Incident Report on December 28, 2016 because she felt the patient ’s rights were 
violated when she also witnessed Officer Wolski draw his Taser , point it at the 
Patient  and then slap  the Patient . (Exhibit 4 ; Testimony of A.R. ) 11 39. On January 3, 2017 the Chief of Police was contacted by a hospital administrator and 
given a copy of A.R.’s Security Unit Incident Report relative to the altercation that 
occurred in the ER involving Mr. Wolski.  (Exhibit 4; Testimony of Police Chief 
Erickson)   
40. On January 3, 2017, after reviewing A.R.’s report, Chief Erickson instructed his 
Deputy Chief to begin an internal investigation of the December 2 8th incident 
involving Mr. Wolski .  (Testimony of Police Ch ief Erickson)  
41. The Deputy Chief conducted an investigation including telephone and in -person 
interviews with  the patient and various hospital personnel who may have witnessed 
part or all of the interaction between Mr. Wolski and the patient on December 28th. 
(Exhibit 15)  
42. As reported by the Deputy Chief, the only hospital staff identified above who 
witnessed the pointing of the Taser  at the patient  by Mr. Wolski was  A.R. . Only one 
(1) hospital staff member saw Mr. Wolski strike the patient .  All of the other  staff 
members interviewed stated they overheard what they believe d was a slapping or 
whacking noise consistent with a slap or punch to human skin.  (Exhibit 18) 
43.  On the afternoon of January 9, 2017 Chief Neil Erickson and Deputy Chief Bernard 
conducted vi deo recorded interviews of Officer Ferreira and Mr. Wolski as part of the 
Gardner Police Department’s internal investigation. (Testimony of Chief Erickson  
and Exhibits 16 and 17 ) 
44.  Prior to their interviews, Officer Ferreira and Mr. Wolski met and had a con versation 
in the parking lot of the Police Station where Officer Ferreira told Mr. Wolski  words 12 to the effect:  “the Chief and Deputy Chief were poking around at the ER and [you]  
should pull a number and do a Use of Force about what happened that day.” Mr. 
Wolski  responded with words to the effect:  “Those assholes,” meaning the Chief of 
Police and the Deputy Chief, “don’t know what the fuck they’re talking about, and 
they probably think that the asshole that fucked [your]  hand up (meaning the Subject 
in Ro om 5 from the Connors Street incident) was the asshole that we had the issue 
with”.  (Testimony of Officer Ferreira)    
45. During that same conversation  on January 9th, Mr. Wolski, in reference to drawing his 
Taser  and pointing it at the Patient , told Officer Ferreira “We’re not going to talk 
about that. You know, we’re just going to say that he was up there and we went 
hands -on and did what we had to do kind of deal”. (Testimony of Officer Ferreira )   
46. During Officer Ferreira’s interview with the Chief of Polic e and Deputy Police Chief  
on January 9th,  Officer Ferreira initially stated that Mr. Wolski hit the patient, but 
Officer Ferreira made no reference to Mr. Wolski pulling his Taser and pointing it at 
the patient. (Exhibits 16 and 18)  
47. The interview with A.R. , the hospital security supervisor who reported seeing Mr. 
Wolski pull his Taser and point it at the patient, had been completed days earlier. 
(Exhibit 18)  
48. When Officer Ferreira failed to make any reference to a Taser, the Deputy Chief 
asked Officer Ferrei ra what he saw before Mr. Wolski hit the patient .  Again, Officer 
Ferreira did not make any reference to Mr. Wolski pulling his Taser . (Exhibits 16 and 
18) 13 49. The Police Chief then specifically asked Officer Ferreira if Mr. Wolski had pulled his 
Taser to whic h Officer Ferreira replied:  “yes”. (Exhibits 16 and 18)  
50. The Deputy Police Chief then stated to Officer Ferreira:  
“Don’t get yourself into something here.  Alright, slow down a minute.  Think 
carefully young man.  You have a long promising career here.  Yo u are not the focal 
point of this, but you are knee deep in some stuff.  I don’t want you to miss another 
thing so take a breath.  If he [the Police Chief] has to repeat something that I asked 
you the first time, I’m not going to be happy.”  (Exhibit 16)  
51. Following this admonition, Officer Ferreira then explained how Mr. Wolski pulled 
his Taser and pointed it at the patient. (Exhibits 16 and 18)  
52. Immediately after the interview with Officer Ferreira, the Police Chief and Deputy 
Police Chief interviewed Mr. Wo lski.  Mr. Wolski was informed that he was being 
interviewed as part of an internal investigation ; he was read his Miranda Rights ; and a 
union representative was present.  (Exhibit 17)  
53. During his January 9th interview, Mr. Wolski  stated that he wanted to “c lear the air” 
regarding what occurred at the hospital on December 28th.  Mr. Wolski stated that 
when he approached the patient  to try and calm him down , the patient  had swatted at 
him and, that, when the patient’s hand came up, Mr. Wolski tried to block it , and that 
is when his hand hit the face of the patient. (Exhibit 1 7) 
54. During this initial statement on January 9th, Mr. Wolski made no reference to pulling 
his Taser and pointing it at the patient. (Exhibit 17)  14 55. The Police Chief then specifically asked Mr. Wolski if he pulled his Taser to which 
Mr. Wolski replied:  “No”.   The Police Chief then stated:  “No?” to which Mr. 
Wolski replied:  “No.”  (Exhibit 17)  
56. The Police Chief then told Mr. Wolski that he (the Police Chief) was suspending Mr. 
Wolski immediately  and that he (the Police Chief) would be moving to terminate Mr. 
Wolski from employment. (Exhibit 17)  
57.   The City’s Mayor, who serves as the appointing authority, appointed the Police 
Chief to serve as a hearing officer for the local (Section 41) civil serv ice hearing.  The 
hearing was conducted and the Police Chief recommended that the Mayor terminate 
Mr. Wolski’s employment.  (Exhibit 13)  
58. The City’s Mayor accepted the recommendation of the Police Chief and terminated 
Mr. Wolski from his position as police officer.  The termination letter to Mr. Wolski, 
signed by the Mayor ,  stated in relevant part:  
“I conclude the following:  
A. That when your position of authority is called into question you fail to conduct 
yourself in a professional manner and in fact, escal ate the situation to a minimum 
of a verbal confrontation and on occasion to a physical confrontation.  This is 
conducting unbecoming a police officer;  
B. That you have failed to comply with the City of Gardner Police Department Rules 
and Regulations as noted  in the Hearing Notice, specifically that you failed to file 
a Use of Force Report and to create a Police Department incident report to 
document your actions regarding the above incident;  
C. That you provided false statements during the course of the interna l investigation 
and the termination hearing;  
D. That you have violated your Oath of Office as a Police Officer, by and through 
your actions in this incident resulting in the filing [of] a criminal complaint 
against you.”  (Exhibit 14)  15 59. Mr. Wolski received a w ritten reprimand in 2012 and a one (1) -day suspension in 
2014.  (Stipulated Facts)  
60.  The Gardner Police Department’s Policy and Procedure titled Use of Force 
Reporting, in effect at all material times, provides in pertinent part as follows:  
A. It is the p olicy of this department to:  
2. Require a written report whenever an employee takes action that results in, or 
is alleged to result in, the injury or death of another person;  
 
3. Require a written report whenever an employee applies force through the use 
of lethal or less -than-lethal weapons;  
 
 4. Require a written report whenever an employee applies weaponless physical  
  force at a level required to be reported.  
  (Exhibit A; Use of Force Reporting at pg. 2)  
 
61.  The Gardner Police Department’s Policy and Pr ocedure titled Electronic Control 
Weapons (ECWs) in effect at all material times, provides in pertinent part as follows:  
 IX. Internal Reporting:  1. Department members who activate an ECW shall:  
 Adhere to Department Policy and Procedure; 1.01 (Use of Forc e). 
 Report ECW activations to the On -Duty Supervisor(s) available.  
 Ensure that the On Duty Supervisor / Or, Department trained ECW 
instructor(s) is provided access to ECW for downloading purposes.  
 Submit a Departmental Use of Force Report:  The involved me mber(s) 
shall:  
 1.02 Use of Force Report prior to end of shift of the activation, absent an 
injury, incapacitation, or other exigent circumstance.  
 (Exhibit B; IX Internal Reporting)  
 
62. In April 2012, Mr. Wolski received a written reprimand regarding two (2) incidents, 
including “taking off [his] badge to meet the challenge of a civilian that challenged 
[him].” (Exhibit 6)  
63. In 2014, Mr. Wolski received a one (1) -day suspension for escalating a verbal 
altercation with a department store employee in the presence of an intern. (Exhibit 9)  16 64. In 2016, the Police Department conducted an investigation into inquiries that Mr. 
Wolski made to another police department regarding an ongoing State Police murder 
investigation.  At the conclusion of the investigation, the Police  Chief informed Mr. 
Wolski that he planned on suspending Mr. Wolski for three (3) days.  Ultimately, it 
was agreed that Mr. Wolski would do three (3) days of volunteer work and the Police 
Chief did not suspend Mr. Wolski, as initially planned. (Testimony o f Chief 
Erickson)  
Legal Standard  
 G.L. c. 31, § 43 provides:  
 
 “If the commission by a preponderance of the evidence determines that there was 
just cause for an action taken against such person it shall affirm the action of the 
appointing  authority, other wise it shall reverse such action and the person concerned 
shall be  returned to his position without loss of compensation or other rights; 
provided, however, if the employee by a preponderance of evidence, establishes that 
said action was based  upon harmf ul error in the application of the appointing 
authority’s procedure, an error of law, or upon any factor or conduct on the part of the 
employee not reasonably related to  the fitness of the employee to perform in his 
position, said action shall not be susta ined, and the person shall be returned to his 
position without loss of compensation or other  rights. The commission may also 
modify any penalty imposed by the appointing authority.”  
 
     An action is “justified” if it is “done upon adequate reasons suffic iently supported by 
credible  evidence, when weighed by an unprejudiced mind; guided by common sense and 
by correct rules of law ;” Commissioners of Civil Service v. Municipal Ct. of Boston , 359 
Mass. 211, 214 (1971); Cambridge v. Civil Service Comm’n , 43 Ma ss.App.Ct. 300, 304 
(1997); Selectmen of Wakefield v. Judge of First Dist. Ct. , 262 Mass. 477, 482 (1928). 
The Commission determines justification for discipline by inquiring, “whether the 
employee has been guilty of substantial misconduct which adversely affects the public 
interest by impairing the efficiency of public service ;” School Comm. v. Civil Service 17 Comm’n , 43 Mass.App.Ct. 486, 488 (1997); Murray v. Second Dist. Ct. , 389 Mass. 508, 
514 (1983).  
The Appointing Authority’s burden of proof by a prepon derance of the evidence is 
satisfied “if it is made to appear more likely or probable in the sense that actual belief in 
its truth, derived from the evidence, exists in the mind or minds of the tribunal 
notwithstanding any doubts that may still linger ther e;” Tucker v. Pearlstein , 334 Mass. 
33, 35-36 (1956).  
Under section 43, the Commission is required “to conduct a de novo hearing for the 
purpose of finding the facts anew ;” Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , 447 Mass. 814, 
823 (2006) and cases cited.  Howev er, “[t]he commission’s task.. .is not to be 
accomplished on a wholly blank slate. After making its de novo findings of fact, the 
commission does not act without regard to the previous decision  of the [appointing 
authority], but rather decides whether ‘the re was reasonable justification for the action 
taken by the appointing authority in the circumstances found by the commission to have 
existed when the appointing authority made its decision’,” which may include an adverse 
inference against a complainant wh o fails to testify at the hearing before the appointing 
authority ; Falmouth v. Civil Service Comm’n , Id., quoting internally from Watertown v. 
Arria , 16 Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983) and cases cited.   
 
By virtue of the powers conferred by their office, police officers are held to a high 
standard
  of conduct. "Police officers are not drafted i nto public service; rather, they 
compete for  their positions. In accepting employment by the public, they implicitly agree 
that they will not engage in conduct which calls into question, their ability and fitness to 18 perform their official responsibilities. " Police Commissioner of Boston v. Civil Service 
Commission , 22 Mass.App.Ct. 364, 371 (1986).  
Analysis  
     This decision rests heavily on the credibility of the witnesses, particularly Mr. Wolski 
and his former colleague, Officer Ferreira, in addition to the hospital employees that 
testified before the Commission.  
     As part of the Commission hearing, I listened carefully to the testimony of all 
percipient witnesses who saw or heard part or all of the relevant interaction s between Mr. 
Wolski and the pat ient at the hospital on December 28, 2016.  I also reviewed their 
testimony again by reading the written transcript prepared of the hearing.  Finally, I 
reviewed the summary of statements given by the hospital employees as part of the Police 
Department’s i nvestigation of this matter  and reviewed (twice)  the recorded interviews of 
Mr. Wolski and Officer Ferreira . 
     None of the percipient witnesses remember what happened that day exactly the same 
way.  Most of the inconsistencies are easily explainable.  F or example, in regard to 
whether or not Mr. Wolski pulled his Taser that day and pointed it at the patient, some of 
the hospital employees, based on their own testimony and statements, were simply not 
focused on the patient at the time or possibly were not  in the immediate area when this 
very short interaction (5 -7 seconds) occurred.   
     That is not the case, however, regarding the testimony of M.G., a Patient Safety 
Specialist at the hospital, whose version of events stands in stark contrast to many of the  
other witness es.  M.G. testified that, after punching i n at 2:55 P.M., she recalls walking 
down the hallw ay; seeing Mr. Wolski and Officer Ferreira standing next to each other; 19 then seeing Mr. Wolski and the patient having a “pleasant conversation” an d making 
“small talk”.  She then recalls the patient “escalating”; at which point she and Mr. Wolski 
walked into Room 7 and tried to de -escalate the patient, who was refusing Mr. Wolski’s 
repeated requests to have him (the patient) get onto the bed.  She t hen recalls leaving the 
room out of fear and hearing a loud smacking sound.   Most importantly, M.G. does not 
recall seeing Mr. Wolski pull his taser and aim it at the patient.  Although I don’t believe 
M.G. was trying to mislead anyone with her statement o r testimony, I have, based on a 
review of all the witness testimony, concluded that she either misremembers what 
happened that day and/or, prior to arriving directly outside Room 7, her attention was 
drawn to other matters, causing her not to see Mr. Wolsk i pull his Taser and aim it at the 
patient that day.  
     Other than Mr. Wolski, the person who  testified before the Commission who  was in 
the best position to hear and see the interaction between Mr. Wolski and the patient at the 
hospital that day was Off icer Ferreira, making his credibility central to this case.  I 
considered all factors that could potentially detract from Officer Ferreira’s credibility 
including:  
 When first asked  by the Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief  to give his account of 
what occ urred at the hospital that day, Officer Ferreira did not state that Mr. Wolski 
had pulled his Taser and aimed it at the patient;  
 
 During that same interview, when given the opportunity to clarify his statement, 
Officer Ferreira again did not state that Mr . Wolski had pulled his Taser and aimed it 
at the patient;  
 
 Only after being specifically asked whether Mr. Wolski pulled his Taser did Officer 
Ferreira state that Mr. Wolski pulled his Taser at the hospital;  
 
 Officer Ferreira’s testimony before the Comm ission was more detailed than his 
statement to the Police Department, including references to seeing Mr. Wolski in a 
“swaying, taunting”  motion while holding the Taser  and pointing it at the patient ; 20  
 Other parts of Officer  Ferreira ’s testimony before the Commission differed from his 
statement to the Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief including:  he referenced 
having a 45 -minute conversation with the patient in his statement to the Police 
Department, while stating that the conversation was only 15 -20 minu tes during his 
testimony before the Commission; and he stated that both he and Mr. Wolski walked 
toward the patient when Mr. Wolski returned to the hospital in his statement to the 
Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief, while stating that only Mr. Wolski wa lked 
toward the patient during his testimony before the Commission;   
 
 Officer Ferreira, prior to his testimony before the Commission, had never stated that 
Mr. Wolski, in a meeting prior to the internal investigation, had suggested that the 
officers not d isclose that Mr. Wolski had pulled his Taser that day.  
 
 Officer Ferreira’s testimony was given after receiving a written reprimand that could 
be removed from his file within one (1) year . 
 
     Based on all of the above factors, I struggled regarding wheth er, and to what extent, I 
should credit Officer Ferreira’s testimony before the Commission.  Based on his own 
testimony before the Commission, he met with Mr. Wolski shortly before his interview 
with the Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief.  Again, based on Officer Ferreira’s own 
testimony, he and Mr. Wolski discussed whether the officers should disclose if Mr. 
Wolski pulled his Taser at the hospital.  After this pre -meeting, Officer Ferreira then met 
with the Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief.  Upon en tering the interview room, the 
Deputy Police Chief made it clear that the interview involved a serious matter and had 
Officer Ferreira acknowledge receipt of his “Garrity Rights”.  Despite this, Officer 
Ferreira recounted the events at the hospital on Dece mber 28th without stating that Mr. 
Wolski pulled his Taser.  Even after being given the opportunity to clarify his statement, 
he again failed to mention the pulling of the Taser.  Only after being directly asked about 
the Taser did Officer Ferreira state t hat Mr. Wolski pulled his Taser that day.  In short, 
Officer Ferreira was either untruthful by omission (by twice failing to reference the 21 pulling of the Taser) or he was untruthful by stating that Mr. Wolski pulled his Taser at 
the hospital that day.  
     Ultimately, after reviewing all of the testimony and evidence, including that 
referenced above, I have credited Officer Ferreira’s testimony that he witnessed Mr. 
Wolski pull his Taser and aim it at the patient in the hospital on December 28th for the 
following reasons.  First, I do not believe that Officer Ferreira  would offer damaging 
testimony against his former colleague if it was not true.  To me, it appeared obvious that 
Officer Ferreira’s initial omissions to the Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief  were 
made as part of a troubling and ill -advised attempt to protect his colleague.  Second, 
Officer Ferreira’s testimony regarding the pulling of the Taser corroborates the 
independent statement and testimony of a hospital employee (A.R.) who was in close  
proximity at the time.  Third, Officer Ferreira’s testimony is bolstered by the text 
message exchange between him and Mr. Wolski shortly after the officer left the hospital 
that day.  As referenced in the findings, Officer Ferreira specifically referenced  Mr. 
Wolski “fucking with” the Patient with a Taser and Mr. Wolski replies with a message 
starting with:  “That’s rite …”.   Fourth, Officer Ferreira’s testimony was bolstered by the 
fact that he did not offer simple “yes or no” answers to the questions po sed to him.  
Rather, he offered specific, detailed answers and he was quick to correct any incorrect 
premises underlying the question, including where he was standing at different times 
during the incident at the hospital on December 28th.   
     In contra st, on many key points, I did not credit the testimony of Mr. Wolski.  Many 
of his answers appeared to be equivocal, contradictory a nd/or simply unbelievable.  For 
example, the following questions and answers , listed in chronological order as they were 22 asked and answered before the Commission,  are part of Mr. Wolski’s own direct 
testimony:  
Appellant Counsel:  As you sit here today, do you remember drawing your Taser?  
 
Mr. Wolski:    No, not particularly, no.  I do not remember .  I know for a fact,  
      I didn’t take it out, I didn’t point it, hold it up, turn it on like is  
      being alleged.  That is not true.  That did not happen.  There is  
      no proof that that did happen, okay.  If at all, I took the thing   
      out, it was very brief unclipped an d turned as a reaction because  
      I didn’t know what this guy was going to do, it was reholstered  
      and that’s when I approached him, you know . 
   
      … 
 
Appellant Counsel:  How come you didn’t do any documentation regarding the incident  
      in Room 7?  
 
Mr. Wolski:    Well, first of all, I would say, and it’s not a very good excuse, but  
      it's not unlike I said before, it’s not unusual for us to assist them  
      with restraining somebody and not necessarily doing a report.   
      I know tha t there’s some discussion about whether or not the Taser  
      was used.  My interpretation of the Taser being used is turned on  
      or deployed.  Just taking it out of the holster is not using it unless  
      you point it at somebody and give verbal co mmands, which I did  
      not do.  So as far as I was concerned, I did not use the Taser . 
 
      … 
 
Appellant Counsel:  Now, at the time when you met with him [Officer Wolski] on the  
      9th [before the interview with the Chief and Deputy Police Chief],   
      did you recall that you had taken your Taser out?  
 
Mr. Wolski:    We never discussed that.  
 
Appellant Counsel:  As you sit here today, do you recall having your Taser out?  
 
Mr. Wolski:    No, no.  
 
       
     The following exchange then took place dur ing cross -examination:  
 
City Counsel:    And help me out here.  Was your testimony:  I did not take out my  
      Taser?  Is that your testimony, that you did not take out your  
      Taser on the 28th? 23  
Mr. Wolski:    I don’t believe that I did.  
 
City Counse l:   You don’t believe you did?  
 
Mr. Wolski:    No. 
 
City Counsel:    So you did not take your Taser out?  
 
Mr. Wolski:    What I’m saying is that I don’t believe I did.   
 
City Counsel:    You don’t believe you did?  
 
Mr. Wolski:    And I don’t recall taking it out. 
 
City Counsel:    Well, is it you don’t believe and you don’t recall?  
 
Mr. Wolski:    Correct.  
 
    Standing alone, this testimony made me question Mr. Wolski’s credibility as he went 
from:  a) not remembering – at all – pulling out his Taser at the hos pital on December 
28th ; to:  b) then offering specific details about re -holstering the Taser; to  c) then stating 
that he didn’t file a report because he believed that simply pulling his Taser out of his 
holster, as opposed to pointing it and giving verba l commands, did not require the filing 
of a report; and finally, to:  d) then reverting to a statement that he doesn’t recall taking 
the Taser out.  
     Versions a and d  (no memory of pulling the Taser)  of Mr. Wolski’s testimony, in 
addition to contradicti ng versions c and d, are not believable considering  the text 
messages referenced above.  Other key parts of Mr. Wolski’s testimony before the 
Commission appear ed to evolve , further undermining his credibility.  For example, in 
regard to what occurred just  before he slapped the patient in the hospital, Mr. Wolski f irst 
testified that the patient:  24 “ … stands up, he ma de like a swatting motion, like towards my gear, towards my 
face, and at that point I smacked – I hit his hands out of the way and I did strike  him 
with my hand.  As I hit him – as I was hitting his hands out of the way, my hand 
struck his face and he went back, and it was almost like it caught him on surprise, you 
know.”        
 
     Regarding this same timeframe, Mr. Wolski later testified that:  
“I think that’s when he [the patient] tried to attack me and threw his hands at me,  
  whatever it was he did.”  
 
     In summary, I found the testimony of Officer Ferreira to be more credible regarding 
the key events relevant to this appeal.  Thus, based on Officer Ferreira’s testimony, and 
after assessing the testimony of all other witnesses and reviewing the entire record, I have 
concluded that the City, by a preponderance of the evidence, has proven the following:  
I. Mr. Wolski, without justification :  a) drew his Taser from his utility belt and pointed 
it directly at the patient ; and b) struck the patient  with an open hand across his face.   I 
do not credit Mr. Wolski ’s testimony that the patient was grabbing at his duty belt and 
his shirt or that the patie nt tried to attack him or throw his hands at Mr. Wolski . 
II. I make no finding or conclusion as to whether this use of force rose to the level of a 
commission of an assault and battery as alleged in an Application for a Criminal 
Complaint filed by Chief Ericks on.8   A full reading of the Police Department Rules, 
however, leaves little doubt that the City’s decision to terminate Mr. Wolski  did not 
hinge on a criminal complaint being issued by a Clerk Magistrate, as the Police 
Department Rule regarding engaging i n this type of conduct  is violated “regardless 
of the outcome of any criminal court case”.  (Exhibit 12)  
                                                 
8 According to the Police Chief, the Court did not find probable cause, but, rather, decided to “hold” the 
complaint for six (6) months and, if nothing happened during those six (6) months, the complaint would 
“go away.”  25 III. Mr. Wolski failed to notify his commanding officer and submit the required reports 
indicating that he engaged in a use of force.  Even Mr. Wolski  ackn owledges that he 
made physical contact with the patient on the day in question and “hit him with an 
open hand”.  Even if I accept Mr. Wolski ’s version of events, which I do not, he was 
still required to comply with department policy and report that he used force against a  
citizen.  
IV. Mr. Wolski violated the Police Department Rules and Regulations when he was 
untruthful at his interview  with the Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief  on January 
9th when he said he did not pull his Taser  at the hospital on Decemb er 28th.  I do not 
credit his testimony that he could not recall whether or not he pulled his Taser.     
     An appointing authority is well within its rights to take disciplinary action when a 
police officer has “a demonstrated willingness to fudge the t ruth in exigent 
circumstances” because “[p]olice work frequently calls upon officers to speak the truth 
when doing so might put into question a search or embarrass a fellow officer” .  Falmouth 
v. Civil Service Comm’n ,  citing Cambridge v. Civil Service Com m’n, 303. 
     Dozens of Commission decisions ha ve held that untruthfulness by a police officer 
warrants discipline, up to and including termination.  
     In Ryan v. Needham Police Departmen t, 20 MCSR 133 (2007), the Commission 
upheld the termination of a police officer for failing to speak the truth in Court and 
perjuring himself.  
     In Layne v. Town of Tewksbury , 20 MCSR 372 (2007), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police officer for rudeness and profanity in his dealing with the public and 
his subsequent lying and filing false reports to avoid the consequences of his conduct.  26      In Grinham v. Town of Easton , 20 MCSR 534 (2007), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police Sgt. who beat up a prisoner in custody, suborned his fellow officers 
to testify on his behalf, filed false reports and lied about his conduct.  
     In Rizzo v. Town of Lexington , 21 MCSR 634 (2008), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police officer for excessive force, lying, conduct unbecoming and failure 
to follow p rocedures.  
     In Mozeleski v. City of Chicopee,  21 MCSR 676 (2008), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police officer who conducted a late -night traffic stop involving a sole 
female and his subsequent conduct in falsifying a report in an attempt to  cover up his 
interaction.  
     In Desharnias v. City of Westfield , 23 MCSR 418 (2010), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police officer who damaged his cruiser and then untruthfully denied that he 
had damaged the cruiser.  
     In Kinnas v. Town of Shrewsbury , 24 MCSR 67 (2011), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police officer who accessed the Facebook account of a colleague’s wife 
and subsequently being untruthful by denying it.  
     In Ung v. Lowell Police Department , 24 MCSR 567 (2011), th e Commission upheld 
the discharge of a police officer who filed false stolen motor vehicle reports on the 
automobile of a woman he was apparently trying to seduce.  
     In Gonsalves v. Town of Falmouth , 25 MCSR 231 (2012), the Commission upheld the 
discha rge of a police officer for negligent handling of evidence and repeated 
untruthfulness.  27      In Freitas v. City of Somerville , 25 MCSR 259 (2012), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police officer for giving confiscated marijuana to a friend and then  lying 
about the incident in a deposition while under oath.  
     In Hadis v. Town of Oxford , 27 MCSR 200 (2014), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police officer for seeking to conceal from his superiors his involvement in 
a traffic stop that had re sulted in vehicle damage.  
     In Pierce v. City of Attleboro,  27 MCSR 329 (2014), the Commission upheld the 
discharge of a police officer who failed to file the required reports governing the use of 
his Taser and subsequently failed to be truthful during the investigation.  
     In Desmond v. Town of West Bridgewater , 27 MCSR 645 (2014), the Commission 
upheld the discharge of a police officer who lied at a hearing to determine whether a 
temporary restraining order sought by his girlfriend against her husban d should be 
extended.  
     Having determined that Mr. Wolski  did engage in some misconduct, the Commission 
must now determine whether the level of discipline (termination) was warranted.  
     As stated by the SJC in Falmouth v. Civ. Serv. Comm’n , 447 Mas s. 814 (2006):  
     “After making its de novo findings of fact, the commission must pass judgment  
 on the penalty imposed by the appointing authority, a role to which the statute  
 speaks directly.  G.L. c. [31], s. § 43 (‘The commission may also modify any   
 penalty imposed by the appointing authority.’)  Here the commission does  
 not act without regard to the previous decision of the [appointing authority] ,  
but rather decides   whether ‘there was reasonable justification for the action taken by  
the appoi nting  authority in the circumstances found by the commission to have  
existed when  the appointing authority made its decision.” Id. citing  Watertown v.  
Arria ,16 Mass.App.Ct. 331, 334 (1983).  
 
 “Such authority to review and amend the penalties of the many d isparate  
 appointing authorities subject to its jurisdiction inherently promotes the  
 principle of uniformity and the ‘equitable treatment of similarly situated  
 individuals.’ citing Police Comm’r of Boston v. Civ. Serv. Comm’n , 39 28  Mass.App.Ct. 594, 60 0 (1996).  However, in promoting these principles,  
 the commission cannot detach itself from the underlying purpose of the  
 civil service system — ‘to guard against political considerations, favoritism  
 and bias in governmental employment decisions .” Id. (citations omitted).  
 
 -- 
 
 “Unless the commission’s findings of fact differ significantly from those reported  
 by the town or interpret the relevant law in a substantially different way, the  
 absence of political considerations, favoritism or bias would warrant essentially  
 the same penalty.  The commission is not free to modify the penalty imposed by  
 the town on the basis of essentially similar fact finding without an adequate  
 explanation.” Id. at 572.  (citation s omitted ). 
 
     My findings do not d iffer significantly from those reported by the City.  Like the City, 
I have conclude d that Mr. Wolski was untruthful during a departmental investigation, that 
he violated the City’s Use of Force Policy, and that he failed to file the required reports 
regar ding his use of force.    
     In regard to whether the City’s discipline has been uniformly applied, the Police Chief 
was questioned during his testimony before the Commission about two (2) other police 
officers who were previously found to be untruthful.  Based solely on the Police Chief’s 
testimony, and absent any additional evidence, Mr. Wolski has not shown that these 
individuals were similarly situated and treated differently.  One of the police officers 
referenced was ultimately terminated and the cir cumstances regarding the other officer’s 
alleged misconduct appears to be distinguishable from the array of charges against Mr. 
Wolski here.  
     It is a (much) closer call regarding whether Officer Ferreira, who lied by omission 
(twice) in his statements to the Police Chief and Deputy Police Chief as part of this 
investigation, was treated differently than Mr. Wolski.  Officer Ferreira received only a 
reprimand, to be removed from his personnel file at some point, apparently for failing to 29 report the force  he witnessed at the hospital, as opposed to his untruthfulness.  Further, 
the tone and tenor of the interviews with these two officers was noticeably different .  The 
interview with Officer Ferreira appeared to be more of a counseling session, whereas the 
interview with Mr. Wolski appeared to be more geared toward potential discipline.  
     There are, however, important distinctions between the actions of Mr. Wolski and 
Officer Ferreira.  Most importantly, when Officer Ferreira was specifically asked whethe r 
Mr. Wolski pulled his Taser at the hospital, he stated , truthfully, and without hesitation:  
“yes”.    When Mr. Wolski was asked the same question, he stated, untruthfully, and 
without hesitation:  “no”  (twice).  Second, Officer Ferreira is not the perso n who pulled 
his Taser and/or struck the patient that day without reporting it.  In fact, Officer Ferreira, 
after the incident earlier that day, actually did file a report documenting his altercation 
with the subject, including that he pulled his Taser at that earlier incident.  Third, there 
was no evidence presented to show that Officer Ferreira has a disciplinary record 
comparable to that of Mr. Wolski.  For all of these reasons, a modification in the penalty 
imposed here is not warranted.   
Conclusion  
    Mr. Wolski’s appeal under D1 -17-033 is hereby denied .  
Civil Service Commission  
/s/ Christopher Bowman  
Christopher C. Bowman  
Chairman  
 
By a vote of the Civil Service Commission (Bowman, Chairman; Camuso, Ittleman, 
Stein and Tivnan, Commissioners) on  Marc h 1, 2018 .  
 
Either party may file a motion for reconsideration within ten days of the receipt of this Commission order 
or decision. Under the pertinent provisions of the Code of Mass. Regulations, 801 CMR 1.01(7)(l), the 
motion must identify a clerical or  mechanical error in this order or decision or a significant factor the 
Agency or the Presiding Officer may have overlooked in deciding the case.  A motion for reconsideration 30 does not  toll the statutorily prescribed thirty -day time limit for seeking judic ial review of this Commission 
order or decision.  
 
Under the provisions of G.L c. 31, § 44, any party aggrieved by this Commission order or decision may 
initiate proceedings for judicial review under G.L. c. 30A, § 14 in the superior court within thirty (30 ) days 
after receipt of this order or decision. Commencement of such proceeding shall not, unless specifically 
ordered by the court, operate as a stay of this Commission order or decision.  After initiating proceedings 
for judicial review in Superior Court , the plaintiff, or his / her attorney, is required to serve a copy of the 
summons and complaint upon the Boston office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, with a 
copy to the Civil Service Commission, in the time and in the manner prescribed by Ma ss. R. Civ. P. 4(d)  
 
Notice to:  
Kenneth Anderson, Esq. (for Appellant)  
John Flick, Esq. (for Respondent)  